Transcription for Andrew Huberman： Relationships, Drama, Betrayal, Sex, and Love ｜ Lex Fridman Podcast #393.mp3:
Full transcript: Listen, when it comes to romantic relationships, if it's not 100% in you, it ain't happening. And I've never seen a violation of that statement where it's like, yeah, it's mostly good, and they're this. And is it like the negotiations already? It's doomed. And that doesn't mean someone has to be perfect. The relationship has to be perfect. But it's got to feel 100% inside, like, yes, yes, and yes. The following is a conversation with my dear friend Andrew Huberman, his fourth time on this podcast. It's my birthday, so this is a special birthday episode of sorts. Andrew flew down to Austin just to wish me a happy birthday, and we decided to do a podcast last second. We literally talked for hours beforehand and a long time after, late into the night. He's one of my favorite human beings. Brilliant scientist, incredible teacher, and a loyal friend. I'm grateful for Andrew. I'm grateful for good friends, for all the support and love I've gotten over the past few years. I'm truly grateful for this life, for the years, the days, the minutes, the seconds I've gotten to live on this beautiful earth of ours. I really don't want to leave just yet. I think I'd really like to stick around. I love you all. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. And now, dear friends, here's Andrew Huberman. Trying to run a little bit more. Are you losing weight? I'm not trying to lose weight, but I always do the same fitness routine after, like, 30 years. Basically lift three days a week, run three days a week. But one of the runs is a long run, one of them is medium. One of them is a sprint type thing. So what I've decided to do this year was just extend the duration of the long run. And I like being mobile. I never want to be so heavy that I can't move. I want to be able to go out and run 10 miles if I have to. So sometimes I do, and I want to be able to sprint if I have to. So sometimes I do. And lifting in objects feels good. It feels good to train like a lazy bear and just lift heavy objects. But I've also started training with lighter weights and higher repetitions and for three month cycles, and it gives your joints a rest. And, um, yeah, so probably, you know, it. I think it also is interesting to see how training differently changes your cognition. That's probably hormone related, you know, hormones downstream of training heavy versus hormones downstream of training a little bit lighter. Um, I think my cognition is better when I'm doing more cardio. And when the repetition ranges are a little bit, um, higher. Which is not to say that people who lift heavy are dumb, but there is a cause. There's real value in lifting heavy. There's a lot of angry people listening to this right now. No, no, no. But lifting heavy and then taking three to five minutes rest is far and away a different challenge than running hard for 90 minutes. That's a tough thing. Just like getting in an ice bath. People say, oh, well, how is that any different than working out? Um, well, there are a lot of differences, but one of them is that it's very acute stress. Within 1 second, you're stressed. So I think subjecting the body to a bunch of different types of stressors in space and time is really valuable. So, yeah, I've been playing with the variables in a pretty systematic way. Well, I like long and slow for, like you said, the impact it has on my cognition. Yeah. The wordlessness of it, the way it puts you in, the way it seems to clean out the clutter. Yeah. You know, it can take away that hyper focus and put you more in a relaxed focus for sure. Well, for me, it brings the clutter to the surface at first. Like, all these thoughts come in there, and then they dissipate. You know, I've been. Because I got knee barred pretty hard. That's when somebody tries to break your knee. That was a knee bar. They try and break your knee. Oh, yeah. So you tap. So they. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So it's, you know, hyper extend the knee that direction. It got knee barred pretty hard. So, um, in ways I don't understand, it kind of hurts to run. I don't understand what's happening behind there. I need to investigate this. It basically, this, the hamstring flex, like curling your leg hurts a little bit. Okay. And that results in this weird, dull, but sometimes extremely sharp pain in the back of the knee. So I'm. I'm work. I'm working through this anyway. But walking doesn't hurt. So I've been playing around with walking recently, like, for 2 hours and thinking. Cause I know a lot of, like, smart people throughout history have walked and thought, and you have to, like, you know, play with things that have worked for others, not just to exercise, but to, like, integrate this very light, kind of prolonged exercise into a productive life. So they do all their thinking while they walk. It's like a meditative type of walking. And it's really interesting. It really works. Yeah. The practice I've been doing a lot more of lately is I walk while reading a book in the yard. I'll just pace back and forth or walk in a circle. Audiobook or. Are you talking. No, hard to. Hard copy. Were you just holding. I'm holding the book and I'm walking and I'm reading. Yeah. And I usually have a pen and I'm underlining. I have this whole system, like underlining stars, exclamation points. Goes back to University of what things that will go back to which things I export to notes and that kind of thing. But from the beginning, when I opened my lab at that time in San Diego, before I moved back to Stanford, I would have meetings with my students or postdocs by just walking in the field behind the lab, you know, and I'd bring my bulldog Costello. Bulldog mastiff at the time, and he was a slow walker. So these were slow walks. But I can think much more clearly that way. There's a Nobel Prize winning professor at Columbia University School of Medicine, Richard Axel, who, who won the Nobel Prize, co won the Nobel Prize with Linda Buck for the discovery of the molecular basis of olfaction. And he walks in, voice dictates his papers. And now with Rev or these other. Maybe there are better ones than rev where you can convert audio files into text very quickly and then edit from there. So I will often voice dictate first drafts and things like that. And I totally agree on the long runs, the walks, the integrating that with cognitive work, harder to do with sprints. And then the gym, you kNow, are you, you weight TraIn, you just seem naturally strong and like thicker jointed. It's true. Yeah, it's true. I mean, we did the one very beginner. Cause I'm a very beginner of jujitsu class TogEtHER. And, yeah, as I mentioned then what if people missed it? Lex, it's freakishly strong. I think I was born genetically to hug people. Oh, like costello. Exactly. You guys have a certain similarity. He had wrists like, you know, it's like you and Jaco and Costello have these like wrists and elbows that are super thick, you know, and then when you look around, you see tremendous variation. You know, some people have like the. The wrist width of a whippet or Woody Allen, and then other People like you or Jocko or, you know, there's this one Jaco video or thing on GQ or something. Have you seen the comments on Jaco? These are the best. No, the comments. I love the comments on YouTube. Cause occasionally they're funny. The best is when Jaco was born, the doctor looked at his parents and said, it's a man, like Chuck Norris type comments. Oh yeah, those are great. That's what I miss about Rogan being on YouTube with the full length episode. Oh, the comments. So this is technically a birthday podcast. What do you love most about getting older? It's like the confirmation that comes from getting more and more data, which basically says, yeah, the first time you thought that thing, it was actually right, because the second, third, and fourth and fifth time it turned out the exact same way. In other words, there have been a few times in my life where I did not feel easy about something. I felt a signal from my body, this is not good. And I didn't trust it early on, but I knew it was there. And then two or three bad experiences later, I'm able to say, ah, every single time there was a signal from the body informing my mind, this is not good. Now, the reverse has also been true that there have been a number of instances in which I feel sort of immediate delight. And there's this kind of almost astonishingly simple experience of feeling comfortable with somebody or at peace with something or delighted at an experience. And it turns out all, literally all of those experiences and people turned out to be experiences and people that are still in my life and that I still delight in every day. In other words, what's great about getting older is that you stop questioning the signals that come from the, I think, deeper recesses of your nervous system to say, hey, this is not good. Or, hey, this is great. More of this. Whereas I think in my teens, my twenties, my thirties, I'm 40, almost 48, I'll be 48 next month. I didn't trust, I didn't listen. I actually put a lot of work into overriding those signals and learning to fight through them, thinking that somehow that was making me tougher or somehow that was making smarter, when in fact, in the end, those people that you meet that are difficult or there are other names for it, in the end, you're like, yeah, that person's a piece of shit, or, this person is amazing and they're really wonderful. And I felt that from go. So you've learned to trust your gut versus the influences of other people's opinions. I've learned to trust my gut versus the, uh, the forebrain. Overanalysis. Overriding the gut. Other people often in my life have had great optics, right? I've benefited tremendously from an early age of being in a large community of what has been mostly guys. But I have some close female friends and always have as well, who will tell me that that's a bad decision, or this person not so good, or be careful, or they're great, or that's great. So oftentimes, my community and the people around me have been more aligned with the correct choice than knowledge. Really? Yes, really. When you were younger, like transparents and. So on, I don't recall ever really listening to my parents that much. I grew up in a, you know, we don't have to go back to my childhood thing, but my sense was that. Thank you. I learned that recently in a psilocybin journey, my first high dose psilocybin journey, which was, welcome back. Done with a clinician. Thank you very much. Thank you. I was worried there for a second at one point in my not coming back back. But in any event, yeah, I grew up with some wild kids. I would say about a third of my friends from childhood are dead or in jail. About a third have gone on to do tremendously impressive things, start companies, excellent athletes, academics, scientists and clinicians. And then about a third are living their lives as kind of more typical. I just mean that they are happy family people with jobs, that they mainly serve the function to make money. They're not sort of career into their career for career's sake. So some of my friends early on gave me some bad ideas, but most of the time, my bad ideas came from overriding the signals that I knew that my body and I, I would say my body and brain were telling me to obey. And I say body and brain is that theres this brain region, the insula, which does many things, but it represents our sense of internal sensation, interoception. And I was talking to Paul Conti about this, who, as you know, I respect tremendously. I think hes one of the smartest people ive ever met, I think for different reasons. He and Mark Andreessen are some of the, the smartest people I've ever met. But Paul's level of insight into the human psyche is absolutely astounding. And he says the opposite of what most people say about the brain, which is most people say, oh, the supercomputer of the brain is the forebrain. It's like a monkey brain with extra real estate put on there. And the forebrain is what makes us human and gives us our superpowers. Paul has said, and he's done a whole series on mental health that's coming out from our podcast in September. So this is not an attempt to plug that, but he'll elaborate on what I'm saying. Wait, you're doing a thing with Paul. We already did. Yeah. So, Paul. Oh, nice. Yeah. So Paul Conti shot up. He and I sat down. He did a four episode series on mental health. This is not mental illness. Mental health about how to explore one's own subconscious, explore the self, build and cultivate the generative drive. You'll learn more about what that is from him. He's far more eloquent and clear than I am. And he provides, essentially, a set of steps to explore the self that does not require that you work with a therapist. This is self exploration that is rooted in psychiatry, it's rooted in neuroscience, and I don't think this information exists anywhere else. I'm not aware that it exists anywhere else. And he essentially distills it all down to one, eight, five by eleven sheet, which we provide for people. And he says there, I don't want to give too much away because I would detract from what he does so beautifully, but if I tried, and I wouldn't accomplish it anyway. But he said, and I believe that the subconscious is the supercomputer of the brain, all the stuff working underneath our conscious awareness that's driving our feelings and what we think are the decisions that we've thought through so carefully, and that only by exploring the subconscious and understanding it a little bit can we actually improve ourselves over time. And I agree. I think that. So that the mistake is to think, that thinking can override it all. It's a certain style of introspection in thinking that allows us to read the signals from our body, read the signals from our brain, integrate the knowledge that we're collecting about ourselves, and. And to use all that in ways that are really adaptive and generative for us. What do you think is there in that subconscious? What do you think of the jungian shadow? What's there? There's this idea you're familiar with, too, I'm sure, that this jungian idea that we all have all things inside of us, that all of us have the capacity to be evil, to be good, et cetera, but that some people express one or the other to a greater extent. But he also mentioned that there's a unique category of people, maybe two to 5% of people, that don't just have all things inside of them, but they actually spend a lot of time exploring a lot of those things, the darker recesses, the shadows, their own shadows. I'm somebody who's drawn to goodness and to light and to joy and all those things like anybody else, but I think maybe it was part of how I grew up, maybe it was the crowd I was with. But then again, even when I started spending more time with academics and scientists, you see shadows in other ways. You see pure ambition with no passion. I recall a colleague in San Diego who, it was very clear to me, did not actually care about understanding the brain. But understanding the brain was just his avenue to exercise ambition. And if you gave him something else to work on, he'd work on that. In fact, he did. He left and he worked on something else. I realized he has no passion for understanding the brain like all the, I assumed all scientists do, certainly why I went into it. But some people, it's just raw ambition. It's about winning. It doesn't even matter what they win, which to me is crazy. But I think that's a shadow that some people explore. Not one I've explored. I think the shadow parts of us are very important to come to understand and look better to understand them and know that they're there and work with them than to not acknowledge their presence and have them surface in the form of addictions or behaviors that damage us in other people. So one of the processes for achieving mental health is to bring those things to the surface. So fish the subconscious mind. Yes. And Paul describes ten cupboards that one can look into for exploring the self. There's the structure of self and the function of self. Again, this will all be spelled out in this series in a lot of detail. Terms of its relational aspect between people, how to pick good partners and good relationship. Gets really into this from a very different perspective. Yeah, fascinating stuff. I was just sitting there, just, I will say this, that that four episode series with Paul is at least to date, the most important work I've ever been involved in in all of my career, because it's very clear that we are not taught how to explore our subconscious and that very few people actually understand how to do that, even most psychiatrists. He mentioned something about psychiatrists. You know, if youre a cardiothoracic surgeon or something like that, and 50% of your patients die, youre considered a bad cardiothoracic surgeon. But with no disrespect to psychiatrists, there are some excellent psychiatrists out there. There are also a lot of terrible psychiatrists out there, because unless all of their patients commit suicide or half commit suicide, they can treat for a long time without it becoming visible that they're not so good at their craft. Now, he's superb at his craft, and I think he would say that, yes, exploring some shadows, but also just understanding the self really understanding who am I and what's important, what are my ambitions? What are my strivings? Again, I'm lifting from some of the things that he'll describe exactly how to do this. People do not spend enough time addressing those questions, and as a consequence, they discover what resides in their subconscious through the sometimes bad, hopefully also good, but manifestations of their actions. We are driven by this huge 90% of our real estate that is not visible to our conscious awareness. And we need to understand that. You know, I've talked about this before. I've done therapy twice a week since I was a kid. I had to as a condition of being let back in school. I found a way to either through insurance or even when I didn't have insurance. I took an extra job writing for Thrasher magazine when I was a postdoc so I could pay for therapy at a discount because I didn't make much money as a postdoc. I mean, I think for me it's as important as going to the gym and people think it's just ruminating on problems or getting somewhere. No, no, no. If you work with somebody really good, they're forcing you to ask questions about who you really are, what you really want. It's not just about support, but there should be support, there should be rapport. But then it's also, there should be insight. Most people who get therapy, they're getting support, there's rapport. But insight is not easy to arrive at. And a really good psychologist or psychiatrist can help you arrive at deep insights that transform your entire life. Well, sometimes when I look inside and I do this often, you know, exploring who you truly are, you come to this question, do I accept once you see parts, do I accept this or do I fix this? Is this who you are? Fundamentally, and it will always be this way, or is this a problem to be fixed? Like, for example, one of the things, especially recently, but in general over time, I've discovered about myself, probably has roots in childhood, probably has roots in a lot of things, is I deeply value loyalty, maybe more than the average person. And so when there's disloyalty, it can be painful to me. And so this is who I am. And so do I have to relax a bit? Do I have to fix this part or is this who you are? And there's a million? That's one little. I think loyalty is a good thing to cling to, provided that when loyalty is broken, that it doesn't have disrupt too many other areas of your life. But it depends also on who's disrupting that loyalty. If it's a coworker versus a romantic partner versus your exclusive romantic partner, depending on the structure of your romantic partner life. I mean, I have always experienced extreme joy and feelings of safety and trust in my friendships. Again, mostly male friendships, but female friendships, too, which is only to say that they were mostly male friendships. The female friendships have also been very loyal. So getting backstabbed is not something I'm familiar with. And, yeah, I love being crewed up, for sure. And I'm with you, and you and I very much have the same values on this, but that's one little thing. And then there's many other things. Like, I'm extremely self critical. And you look at my, you know, I look at myself as I'm regularly very self critical. There's a self critical engine in my brain. And I talked to, actually, Paul about this, I think, on the podcast quite a bit, and he's saying, this is a really bad thing. Like, you need to fix this. You need to be able to be regularly very positive about yourself. And I kept disagreeing with him, no, this is, like, who I am, like you. And it seems to work. Don't mess with a thing that seems to be working. It's fine. Like, I oscillate between being really grateful and really self critical, but then you have to, like, figure out, what is it? Maybe there's a deeper root thing. There's an. Maybe there's an insecurity in there somewhere that has to do with childhood, and then you're trying to prove something to somebody from your childhood, this kind of thing. Well, a couple things that I think are hopefully valuable for people here. One is, one way to destroy your life is to spend time trying to control your or somebody else's past. So much of our destructive behavior and thinking comes from wanting something that we saw or did or heard to not be true, rather than really working with that and getting close to what it really was. And sometimes those things are even traumatic, and we need to really get close to them and for them to move through us and that, you know, there are a bunch of different ways to do that with support from others and hopefully, but sometimes on our own as well, I don't think we can rewire our deep preferences and what we find despicable or joyful. I do think that it's really a question of what allows us peace. Like, can you be at peace with the fact that you're very self critical and enjoy that, get some distance from it? Have a sense of humor about it? Or is it driving you in a way that's keeping you awake at night and forcing you back to the table to do work in a way that feels self flagellating and doesn't feel good? Can you get that humility and awareness of one's flaws? And I think that can create this word space sounds very new agey, like get space from it. You can have a sense of humor about how neurotic we can all be. Neurotic isn't actually a bad term in the classic sense of the psychologists and psychiatrists. The Freudians said that the best case is to be neurotic, to actually see one's own issues and work with them, whereas psychotic is the other way to be, which is obviously not good. So I think the question whether or not to work on something or to just accept it as part of ourselves, I think really depends if we feel like it's holding us back or not. I think you're asking perhaps the most profound question about being a human, which is, what do you do with your body? What do you do with your mind? It's also a question. We started off talking about fitness a little bit, which is for whatever reason, do I need to run an ultra marathon? I don't feel like I need to. David Goggins does, and does a whole lot more than that for him. That's important for me, it's not important to do that. I don't think he does it just so he can run the ultras. Theres clearly something else in there for him. And guys like Cam Haines and tremendous respect for what they do and how they do it. Does one need to make their body more muscular, stronger, more endurance, more flexibility? Do you need to read harder books? Do you need to? I think doing hard things feels good. I know it feels good. I know that the worst way to feel is when I'm procrastinating and I don't do something. And then whenever I do something and I complete it and I break through that point where it was hard and then I'm doing it at the end, I actually feel like I was infused with some sort of super chemical and who knows if it's probably a cocktail of endogenously made chemicals. But I think it is good to do hard things. But you have to be careful not to destroy your body, your mind in the process. And I think it's about whether or not you can achieve peace. Can you sleep well at night? Stress isn't bad if you can sleep well at night. You can be stressed all day, go, go, go, go. And it'll optimize your focus. But can you fall asleep and stay deeply asleep at night? Um, being in a hard relationship, some people say, you know, that's not good. Other people like it. Can you be at peace in that? And I think we all have different rpm. We all kind of idle at different rpm. And some people are big, mellow costellos, and others are kind of like, need more friction in order to feel at peace. But I think ultimately what we want is to feel at peace. Yeah. I've been through some really low points over the past couple of years, and I think the reason could be boiled down to the fact that I haven't been able to find a place of peace, a place or people or moments that give deep inner peace. Yeah. And I think you put it really beautifully. It's. You have to figure out, given who you are, the various characteristics of your mind, all the things, all the contents of the cupboards, how to get space from it. And ultimately, one good representation of that is to be able to laugh at all of it, whatever's going on inside your mind, to be able to step back and just kind of chuckle at the beauty and the absurdity of the whole thing. Yeah, and keep going. There's this beautiful. As I mentioned, it seems like every podcast lately, I'm a huge rancid fan, mostly because I just think Tim Armstrong's writing is pure poetry, and whether or not you like the music or nothing, and he's written music for a lot of other people, too. He's not, doesn't advertise that much because he's humble, but. And by the way, I went to a show of theirs like 20 years ago. Oh, yeah, I'm going to see them in Boston on September 18. I'm literally flying there for. Or I'll take the train up from New York. I'm going to meet a friend of mine named Jim Thiebo, who's a guy who owns a lot of companies in the skateboard industry. We're meeting there like a couple of little kids to go see them play. Amazing, amazing people, amazing music. Very intense, very intense, but embodies all the different emotions. That's why I love it. Right. They have some love songs, they have some hate songs, they have some. And. But, you know, there's a. Going back to what you said, I think there's a song, the first song on the indestructible album, I think there's a. It's sort of. He's just talking about, like, shock and disbelief of discovering things about people that were close to you. And, you know, it's, I won't have. I won't sing it, but, you know, nor I wouldn't dare, but there's this one lyric that's really stuck in my mind ever since that album came out in 2003, which is that nothing's what it seems. So I just sit here laughing. I'm gonna keep going on. I can't get distracted. There is this piece of, like, you gotta learn how to push out the disturbing stuff sometimes and go forward. And, I mean, I remember hearing that lyric and then writing it down. And that was a time where my undergraduate advisor, who was like a mentor and a father to me, blew his head off in the bathtub, like, three weeks before. And then my graduate advisor, who I was working for at that time, who I loved and adored, was really like a mother to me. I knew her when she was pregnant with her two kids, died at 50, breast cancer. And then my postdoc advisor, first day of work at Stanford as a faculty member, sitting across the table like this from him, had a heart attack right in front of me, died of pancreatic cancer at the end of 2017. And I remember just thinking, like, going back to that song lyric over and over and where people would. I haven't had many betrayals in life. I've had a few. But just thinking or seeing something or learning something about something, you can't believe it. And I mentioned that that lyric off that first song, indestructible on that album, because it's this. The raw emotion of, like, I can't believe this. What I just saw is so disturbing, but I have to just keep going forward. There are certain things that we really do need to push not just into our periphery, but often to the gutter and keep going. And that's a hard thing to learn how to do, but if youre going to be functional in life, you have to. And actually, just to get at this issue of do I change or do I embrace this aspect of self. About six months, it was April of this last year, I did some intense work around some things that were really challenging to me, and I did it alone, and it may have involved some medicine. And I expected to get peace through this. I was like, I'm going to let go of the. And I spent 11 hours just getting more and more frustrated and angry about this thing that I was trying to resolve. And I was so unbelievably disappointed that I couldn't get that relief. And I was like, what is this? Like, this is not how this is supposed to work. I'm supposed to be. Feel peace. The clouds are supposed to lift. And so a week went by, and then another half week went bye. And then someone whose opinion I trust very much, I explained this to them because I was getting a little concerned, like, what's going on? This is worse, not better. And they said, this is very simple. You have a giant blind spot, which is your sense of justice. Andrew and your sense of anger are linked like an iron rod, and you need to relax it. And as they said that, I felt the anger dissipate. And so there was something that, I think it is true. I have a very strong sense of justice, and my sense of anger then, at least, was very strongly linked to it. So it's great to have a sense of justice. I hate to see people wronged. I absolutely do. And I'm human. I'm sure I've wronged people in my life. I know I have. They've told me. I've tried to apologize and reconcile, where possible, still have a lot of work to do. But where I see injustice, it draws in my sense of anger in a way that I think is just eating me up. But it was only in hearing that link that I wasn't aware of before. It was in my subconscious, obviously, did I feel the relaxation. There's no amount of plant medicine or MDMA or any kind of chemical you can take that's naturally just going to dissipate. What's hard for oneself if one embraces that, or if one chooses to do it through just talk therapy or journalism journaling or friends or introspection or all of the above, there needs to be an awareness of the things that we're just not aware of. So I think the answer to your question, do you embrace or do you fight these aspects of self, is, I think you get in your subconscious, through good work with somebody skilled or. And sometimes that involves the tools I just mentioned in various combinations, and you figure it out. You figure out if it's serving you. Obviously, it was not bringing me peace. It was undermining my sense of justice. Was undermining my sense of peace. And so in understanding this link now, I would say that in understanding this link between justice and anger, now, I think it's a little bit more of like, you know, it's not like a twizzler stick bendy, but at least it's not like an iron rod. Like, you know, when I see somebody wronged, I mean, it used to just. Like, immediately, but you're able to step back now. That's, like, to me, the ultimate place to reach is laughter. I just sit here laughing. Exactly. That's. That's the lyric I like. I can't believe it. So I just sit here laughing. Like, can't get distracted just at some point. But the. But the problem, I think, in just laughing at something like that gives you distance. But the question is, does, do you stop engaging with it at that point? Like, I experienced this. I mean, recently, I got to see how sometimes I'll see something that's just like, what? Like, this is crazy. So I just laugh, but then I continue to engage in it, and it's taking me off course. And so there is a place where, you know, I mean, I realize this is probably a kid's show, too, so I want to keep it g rated. But at some point, for certain things, it makes sense to go, fuck that. But also laugh at yourself for saying, fuck that. Yeah. And then move on. So the question is, do you get stuck or do you move on? Sure. Sure. But, like, there's a lightness of being that comes with laughter. I mean, I've gotten. Sure. Like, as you know, I spent the day with Elon today. He just gave me this burnt hair. Do you know what this is? I have no idea. I'm sure there's actually. It should be a humor in the lab episode on this. It's a cologne that's burnt hair, and it's, like, supposedly a really intense smell. And it is. Please, it's not gonna leave your nose. That's okay. Well, that's okay. I'll take a gent. I'll whiffen it as if I were. You can spray it on yourself, because I don't know if you can. So, I'm reading an amazing book called an immense World by Ed Yong. He won a Pulitzer for we contain multitudes or something like that, I think is the title of the other book, and the first chapter is all about olfaction and the incredible power that olfaction has. That smells terrible. I don't even know. And it doesn't leave you, for those listening, it doesn't quite smell terrible, is just intense, and it stays with you. This, to me, represents just laughing at the absurdity of it all. So I have to ask. So, you were rolling jiu jitsu? Yeah, we're training jiu jitsu. Yeah. So, is that fight between Elon and Azok actually gonna happen? I think Elon is a huge believer of this idea of the most entertaining outcome is the most likely. And he almost, like, there is almost the sense that there's not a free will and the universe has a kind of deterministic gravitational field pulling towards the most fun. And he's just a player in that game. So from that perspective, I think it seems like something like that is inevitable. Like a little scrap in the parking lot of Facebook or something like that. Exactly. Sorry, meta, but it looks like they're training for Elon Zuck has competed right in jiu jitsu. So I think he is approaching it as a sport. Elon is approaching it as a spectacle. And I mean, the way he talks about it, he's a huge fan of history. He talks about all the warriors that has fought throughout history. If you look, he wants to really do it at the Coliseum, and the Coliseum is for 400 years. There's so many, so much great writing about this. I think over 400,000 people have died in the Colosseum. Gladiators. So this is this historic place that sheds so much blood, so much fear, so much anticipation of battle, all of this. So he loves this kind of spectacle. And also the meme of it, the hilarious absurdity of it. The two tech CEO's battling it out on sand in a place where gladiators fought to the death and then bears and lions ate prisoners as part of the execution process. Well, it's also gonna be an instance where Mark Zuckerberg and Elon Musk exchanged bodily fluids. They bleed. This is one of the things about fighting, you know, I think it was in that book, it's great book fighter's heart, where he talks about, you know, sort of the intimacy of sparring. I only rolled jiu jitsu with you once, but there was a period of time where I boxed and which I dont recommend. I got hit. I hit some guys and definitely got hit back. I spar on Wednesday nights when I lived on San Diego. And when you spar with somebody, even if they hurt you, especially if they hurt you, you see that person afterwards. And theres an intimacy. It was in that bookfires heart where he explains, youre exchanging bodily fluids with a stranger, and you're in your primitive mind. And so there's an intimacy there that persists. So you go together through a process of fear, anxiety, like, yeah, when they. Get you, you nod. I mean, you watch somebody like catch somebody, not so much in professional fighting, but if people are sparring that they catch you, you acknowledge that they caught you. Like, you got me there. And on the flip side of that. So we trained, and then after that, we played Diablo four. I don't know what that is. I don't play video games. Sorry. But it's a video game, so it's like. It's a, you know, pretty intense combat in the video. You're fighting like demons. Okay. Last video game I played was Mike Tyson's punch out. There you go. That's pretty. I met him recently, went on his podcast. You went? You went? Wait, it hasn't come out yet. Oh, hasn't come? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. I asked Mike. Kids are great. They came in there. They're super smart kids. Goodness gracious. They ask great questions. I asked Mike what he did with the piece of Evander's ear that he bit off. Did you remember? He's like, get back to him. Here you go. Sorry about that. He sells edibles that are in the shape of ears with a little bite out of it. Yeah. His life has been incredible. His family, you get the sense that they're really a great family. They're really Mike Tyson. That's a heck of a journey right there, of a man. Yeah. My now friend Tim Armstrong, like I said, lead singer from Rancy, he put it best. He said that Mike Tyson's life is shakespearean. Down, up, down, up. Just the arcs of his life are just sort of an only in America kind of tale, too. Right? So, speaking of Shakespeare, I've recently gotten to know Neri Oxman, who's this incredible scientist that works at the intersection of nature and engineering, and she reminded me of this Anna Ahmatova line. This is this great soviet poet that I really love from over a century ago, that each of our lives is a shakespearean drama race to the thousand degree. So I have to ask, why do you think humans are attracted to this kind of shakespearean drama? Is there some aspect we've been talking about, the subconscious mind, that pulls us towards the drama, even though the place of mental health is peace? Yes and yes. Do you have some of that? A draw towards drama? Yeah, if you look at the empirical data, yes. I mean, right? If I look at the empirical data, I mean, I think about who I chose to work for as an undergraduate, right? I was at, you know, barely finished high school, finally get to college. Barely. I think I. This is really embarrassing and not something to aspire to. You know, I was thrown out of the dorms for fighting. Barely passed my classes. You know, the girlfriend and I split up. I mean, I was living in a squad, got into a big fight. I was getting in trouble with the law eventually got my act together. Go back to school, start working for somebody. Who do I choose to work for? A guy who's an ex navy guy who smokes cigarettes in the fume hood, drinks coffee, and we're injecting rats with MDMA. And I was drawn to the personality, his energy, but he was a great scientist, worked out a lot on thermal regulation in the brain and more. Go to graduate school. I'm working for somebody and decide that, yeah, working in her laboratory wasn't quite right for me. So I'm literally sneaking into the laboratory next door and working for the woman next door because I like the relationships that she had to a certain set of questions, and she was a kind of a quirky person. So drawn to drama, but drawn to. I like characters. I like people that have texture, and I'm not drawn to raw ambition. I'm drawn to people that seem to have a real passion for what they do and a uniqueness to them that I. You know, you can kind of. Not kind of. I'll just say how it is. I can feel their heart for what they do, and I'm drawn to that, like, and that can be good. The same reason I went to work for Ben Barris as a postdoc, it wasn't because he was the first transgender member of the National Academy of Sciences. That was just a feature of who he was. I loved how he loved Glia. He would talk about these cells like they were the most enchanting things that he'd ever seen in his life. And I was like, this is, like, the biggest nerd I've ever met, and I love him. I think I'm drawn to that. This is another thing that Conti makes elaborates on quite a bit more in the series on mental health coming out. But there are different drives within us. There are aggressive drives, not always for fighting, but for intense interaction. Look at Twitter. Look at. People clearly have an aggressive drive. There's also a pleasure drive. Some people also have a strong pleasure drive. They want to experience pleasure through food, through sex, through friendship, through adventure. But I think the shakespearean drama is the drama of the different drives in different ratios in different people. I know somebody, and she's incredibly kind, has an extremely high pleasure drive. Loves taking great care of herself and people around her through food and through retreats and through all these things and makes spaces beautiful everywhere she goes and gifts these things that are just so unbelievably feminine and incredible, these gifts to people and the kind and thoughtful about what they like, but I would say very little aggressive drive from my read. And then I know other people who just have a ton of aggressive drive and very little pleasure drive. And I think. So there's this alchemy that exists where people have these things in different ratios, and then you blend in the differences in the chromosomes and differences in hormones and differences in personal history, and what you end up with is a species that creates incredible recipes of drama, but also peace, also relief from drama, contentment. I mean, I realize this isn't the exact topic of the question, but someone I know very dearly, actually, an ex girlfriend of mine, long term partner, mine, sent me something recently. I think it hit the nail on the head, which is that ideally for a man, they eventually settle where they find and feel peace, where they feel peaceful, where they can be themselves and feel peaceful. Now, I'm sure there's an equivalent or mirror image of that for women, but this particular post that she sent was about men, and I totally agree. It isn't always that we're seeking friction, but for periods of our life, we seek friction. Drama, adventure, excitement, fights, and doing hard, hard things. And then I think at some point, I'm certainly coming to this point now where it's like, yeah, that's all great, and checked a lot of boxes, but had a lot of close calls, flew really close to the sun on a lot of things with life and limb, heart and spirit. And some of people close to us didn't make it. And sometimes not making it means the career they wanted went off a cliff, or their health went off a cliff, or their life went off a cliff. But I think that there's also the shakespearean drama of the characters that exit the play and are living their lives happily in the backdrop. It just doesn't make for as much entertainment. That's one other thing that's a benefit, you could say, is the benefit of getting older is finding the shakespearean drama less appealing or finding the joy in the piece. Yeah, definitely. I mean, I think there's real peace with age. I think the other thing is this notion of checking boxes is a real thing. For me, anyway. I have a morning meditation that I do well. I wake up now, I get my sunlight, I hydrate, I use the bathroom, I do all the things that I talk about. I've started a practice of prayer in the last year, which is new ish for me, which is we could talk. About in the morning. Can you talk about it a little bit? Sure. Yeah. And then I have a meditation that I do that actually is where I think through with the different roles that I play. So I start very basic. I say, okay, I'm an animal. We are biologically animals. Human. I'm a man, I'm a scientist, I'm a teacher, I'm a friend, I'm a brother, I'm a son. I go through this. I have this list, and I think about the different roles that I have and the roles that I still want in my life going forward that I haven't yet fulfilled. It's an inventory of where I've been, where I'm Athena, and where I'm going, as they say. And I don't know why I do it, but I started doing it this last year, I think because it helps me understand just how many different contexts I have to exist in and remind myself that there's still more that I haven't done, that I'm excited about. So within each of those contexts, there's things that you want to kind of accomplish to define that. Yeah. And I'm ambitious, so I think I'm a brother. I have an older sister, and I love her tremendously. And I think I want to be the best brother I can be to her. Which means maybe a call, maybe just. We do an annual trip together for our birthdays. Our birthdays are close together. We always go to New York for our birthdays. And we've gone for the last three, four years really reminding myself of that role. Not because I'll forget, but because I have all these other roles I'll get pulled into. I say the first one, I'm an animal, because I have to remember that I have a body that needs care like any of us. I need sleep, I need food, I need hydration. That I'm human. The brain of a human is marvelously complex, but also marvelously self defeating. At times. I'm thinking about these things in the context of the different roles, and the whole thing takes about four or five minutes, and I just find it brings me a certain amount of clarity that then allows me to ratchet into the day. The prayer piece, I think I've been reluctant to talk about until now because I don't believe in pushing religion on people, and I think that, and I'm not. It's a highly individual thing, and I do believe that one can be an atheist and still pray, or agnostic and still pray. But for me, it really came about through understanding that there are certain aspects of myself that I just couldn't resolve on my own. And no matter how much therapy, no matter how much, and I haven't done a lot of it, but no matter how much plant medicine or other sources of medicine or exercise or podcasting or science or friendship or any of that, I was just not going to resolve. And so I started this because someone close to me said, a male friend said, prayer is powerful. And I said, well, how? And I don't know how, but if you can allow you to get outside yourself, let you give up control and at the same time take control. I don't even like saying take control, but the whole notion is that. And again, forgive me, but there's no other way to say it. The whole notion is that, you know, like, God works through us, whatever God is to you, he, him, her, whatever life force, nature, whatever it is to you, right. That it works through us. And so I do a prayer. I'll just describe it where I ask. I make an ask to help remove my defects, my character defects. I pray to God to help remove my character defects so that I can show up better in all the roles of my life and do good work, which for me is learning and teaching, learning and teaching. And so you might say, well, how is that different than a meditation? Well, I'm acknowledging that there is something that bigger than me, bigger than nature as I understand it, that I cannot understand or control, nor do I want to, and I'm just giving over to that. And does that make me less of a scientist? I sure as hell hope not. I certainly know there's the head of our neurosciences at Stanford until recently. You should talk to him directly about it. Bill Newsom has talked about his religious life. For me, it's really a way of getting outside myself and then understanding how I fit into this bigger picture. And the character defects part is real, right? I'm a human. I have defects. I got a lot of flaws in me, like anybody, but. And trying to acknowledge them and asking for help in removing them, not magically, but through right action, through my right action. So I do that every morning. And I have to say that it's helped. It's helped a lot. It's helped me be better to myself, be better to other people. I still make mistakes, but it's becoming a bigger, bigger part of my life. And I never thought I'd talk like this, but I think it's clear to me that if we don't believe in something, again, doesn't have to be traditional, standardized religion. But if we don't believe in something bigger than ourselves, we at some level will self destruct. I really? I really think so. It's power, and it's powerful in a way that all the other stuff, meditation and all the tools, is not because it's really operating at a much deeper and bigger level. And, you know. Yeah, I think that's all I can talk about it mostly because I'm still working out. You know, the scientists in me wants to understand how it works, and I want to understand. And the point is to just go, you know, there's something. There's, you know, for lack of a better language for it. There's higher power than me and what I can control. I'm giving up control on certain things. And somehow that restores a sense of agency for right action, better action. I think perhaps a part of that is just the humility that comes with acknowledging there's something bigger and more powerful than you. And then you can't control everything. It's. I mean, you go through life as a hard driving person, you know, forward, center of mass. I remember being that way since I was little. It's like a new Legos. I'm like, I'm gonna make all the Legos. I was like, on the weekends, you know, learning about medieval weapons and then giving lectures about it in class when I was five or six years old. We're learning about tropical fish and, you know, cataloging all of them at the store and then organizing it and making my, you know, my dad drive me or my mom drive me to some fish store and then spending all my time there until they throw me out. You know, all of that. But I also remember my entire life, I would secretly pray when things were good and things weren't good, but mostly when things weren't good, because it's important to pray for me. It's important to pray each morning regardless. But when things weren't right, I couldn't make sense of them. I would secretly pray, but I felt kind of ashamed of that for whatever reason. And then it was once in college, I distinctly remember I was having a hard time with a number of things. And I took a run down to Sands beach. It was UC Santa Barbara. And I remember, I just. I was like, I don't know if I even have the right to do this, but I'm just praying. And I just prayed for the ability to be as brutally honest with myself and with other people as I possibly could be about a particular situation I was in at that time. I mean, I think now it's probably safe to say I'd gone off to college because of a high school girlfriend. We had essentially, she was my family, frankly, more than my biological family was at a certain stage of life, and we'd reached a point where we were diverging. And it was incredibly painful. It was like losing everything I had. And it was like, what do I do? How do I manage this? Do I, you know, I was ready to quit and join the fire service just to support us so that we could move forward. And it was just. But praying, just saying, I can't figure this out on my own. It's sort of like, I can't figure this out on my own, and how frustrating that is. No number of friends could tell me and inner wisdom couldn't tell me. And eventually it led me to the right answers. And she and I are friendly friends to this day. She's happily married with a child, and we're on good terms. But I think it's, it's a scary thing, but it's the best thing when you. I can't control all this. And asking for help, I think, is also the piece. You're not asking for some magic hand to come down and take care of it, you're asking for the help to come through you right, so that your body is used to do these right works, right action. Isn't it interesting that this secret thing that you're almost embarrassed by, that you did it as a child, is something you. It's another thing you do as you get older is you realize those things are part of you, and it's actually a beautiful thing. A lot of the content of the podcast is deep academic content. And we talk about everything from eating disorders to bipolar disorder to depression. A lot of different topics, but the tools, the protocols, as we say, the sunlight viewing, all the rest, a lot of that stuff is just stuff I wish I had known when I was in graduate school. If I had known to go outside every once in a while and get some sunlight, not just stay in the lab, I would have. You know, I might not have hit like a really tough round of depression when I was a postdoc and working twice as hard. And when my body would break down or I'd get sick a lot. I don't get sick much anymore. Occasionally about once every 18 months to two years, I get to ill get something. But I used to break my foot skateboarding all the time. I couldnt understand whats wrong with my body. Im getting injured. I cant do what everyone else can now. I developed more slowly at a long arc of puberty, but I. So that was part of it. I was still developing, but how to get your body stronger, how to build endurance. No one told me the information wasn't there. So a lot of what I put out there is the information that I wish I had had, because once I had it I was like, wow, a, this stuff really works. B, it's grounded in something real. Sometimes certain protocols are a combination of animal, human and animal and human studies, sometimes clinical trials, sometimes there's some mechanistic conjecture for some, not all. I always make clear which. But in the end, figuring out how things work so that we can be happier, healthier, more productive, suffer less, like reduce the suffering of the world. And I think that, well, I'll just say thank you for asking about the prayer piece again. I'm nothing pushing or even encouraging it on anyone. I've just found it to be tremendously useful for me. You know, I mean, about prayer in general, you said information and figuring out how to get stronger, healthier, smarter, all those kinds of things. A part of me believes that deeply, you know, you can gain a lot of knowledge and wisdom through learning. But a part of me believes that all the wisdom I need was there when I was eleven and twelve years old. And then it got cluttered over. Well, listen, I can't wait for you and Conti to talk again, because when he gets going about the subconscious and the amount of this that sits below the surface like an iceberg, and the fact that when we're kids, we're not obscuring a lot of that subconscious as as much, and sometimes that can look a little more primitive. I mean, a kid thats disappointed will let you know. A kid thats excited will let you know. And you feel that raw exuberance or that raw dismay. And I think that as we grow older, we learn to cover that stuff up. We wear masks and we have to, to be functional. Right? I dont think we all want to go around just being completely raw, but as you said, as you get older, you get to this point where you kind of go, eh, what are we really trying to protect anyway? I mean, I have this theory that certainly my experience has taught me that a lot of people, but I'll talk about men because that's what I know best, whether or not they show up strong or not, that they're really afraid of being weak. Like they're just afraid. Sometimes the strength is even a way to try and not be weak. Right. Which is different than being strong for its own sake. I'm not just talking about physical strength, I'm talking about intellectual strength. I'm talking about money. I'm talking about expressing drive. I've been watching this series, a little bit of chimp empire. Oh, yeah. So chimp empire is amazing, right? They have the head of. He's not the head chimp, but the alpha in the group. And he's getting older. And so what does he do? Every once in a while, he goes on these vigor displays. He goes and he grabs branch, he starts breaking, and he starts thrashing them. And he's incredibly strong, and they're all kind of, like, watching. I mean, yeah, I immediately think of people like, they're deadlifting on Instagram, and I just think displays of vigor. This is just the primate sewing that displays the vigor. Now, what's interesting is that he's doing that specifically to say, hey, I still have what it takes to lead this troop. Okay? Then there are the ones that are subordinate to him, but not so far behind. It seems to be that there's a very clear numerical ranking. There is. It's clear who's the number two, number. Three, who gets to mate first, who gets to eat first. This exists in other animal societies, too. But Bob Sapolsky would be a great person to talk about this with because he knows, obviously, tremendous amount about it, and I know just the top contour, but, yeah. So number two, three, and four males are aware that he's doing these vigor displays, but they're also aware, because in primate evolution, they got some extra forebrain, too. Not as much as us, but they got some. And they're aware that the vigor displays are displays that, because they've done them as well in a different context, might not just be displays of vigor, but might also be an insurance policy against people seeing weakness. Okay? So now they start using that prefrontal cortex to do some interesting things. So in primate world, if a male is friendly with another male, wants to affiliate with him and say, hey, I'm backing you, they'll go over and they'll pick off the little parasites and eat them. The grooming is extremely important. In fact, if they want to ostracize or kill one of the members of their troop, they will just leave it alone. No one will groom it. And then there's actually a really disturbing sequence in that show of then the parasites start to eat away on their skin. They get infections. They have issues. No one will mate with them. They have other issues as well and can potentially die. So the interesting thing is, is number two and three start to line up a strategy to groom this guy. But they are actually thinking about overtaking the entire troop, setting in a new alpha. But the current alpha did that to get where he is. So he knows that they're doing this grooming thing, but they might not be sincere about the grooming. So what does he do? He takes the whole troop on a raid to another troop and sees who will fight for him and who won't. This is advanced contracting of behavior for species that normally we don't think of as sophisticated as us. So it's very interesting, and it gets to something that I hope we'll have an opportunity to talk about, because it's something that I'm obsessed with lately, is this notion of overt versus covert contracts. There are overt contracts where you exchange work for money or you exchange any number of things in an overt way, but then there are covert contracts, and those take on a very different form and always lead to, in my belief, bad things. Well, how much of human and chimp relationships are over versus covert? Of, well, here's one thing that we know is true. Dogs and humans, the dog to human relationship is 100% overt. They don't manipulate you. Now, you could say they do in the sense that they learn that if they look a certain way or roll on their back, they get food. But there's no banking of that behavior for a future date where then they are going to undermine you and take your position. Okay, so in that sense, dogs can be a little bit manipulative in some sense, but, um, now, okay, so overt contract would be, we both want to do some work together. We're going to make some money. You get x percentage. I get x percentage. Overt covert contract, which is, in my opinion, always bad, would be, we're going to do some work together. You're going to get a percentage of money. I'm going to get a percentage of money could look just like the overt contract, but secretly, I'm resentful that I got the percentage I got. So what I start doing is covertly taking something else. What do I take? Maybe I take the opportunity to jab you verbally every once in a while. Maybe I take the opportunity to show up late. Maybe I take the opportunity to get to know one of your coworkers so that I might start a business with them. That's covert contract. And you see this sometimes in romantic relationships, one person, we won't set the male or female in any direction here and just say it's, I'll make you feel powerful if you make me feel desired. Okay, great. There's nothing explicitly wrong about that contract if they both know and they both agree. But what if it's, I'll do that, but I'll have kids with you, so you feel powerful. You'll have kids with me. So I feel desired, but secretly, I don't want to do that. Or one person says, I dont want to do that, or both dont. So what they end up doing is saying, okay, so I expect something else. I expect you to do certain things for me, or I expect you to pay for certain things for me. Covert contracts are the signature of everything bad. Overt contracts are the signature of all things good. And I think about this a lot, because ive seen a lot of examples of this. Ive, like anyone, we participate in these things whether or not we want to or not. And the thing that gets transacted the most is, well, I should say, the things that get transacted the most are the overt things. You'll see money, time, sex, property, whatever. It happens to be information. But what ends up happening is that when people, I believe, don't feel safe, they feel threatened in some way. Like it's. They don't feel safe in a certain interaction. What they do is they start taking something else while still engaging in the exchange. And I'll tell you, if there's one thing about human nature that's bad, it's that feature. Why that feature? Or is it a bugger feature, as you engineers like to say? I think it's because we were allocated a certain extra amount of prefrontal cortex that makes us more sophisticated than a dog, more sophisticated than a chimpanzee. But they do it, too. And it's because it's often harder to deal with in the short term. To deal with the real sense of, this is scary. This feels threatening than it is to play out all the iterations. It takes a lot of brain work. You're playing chess and go simultaneously trying to figure out where things are going to end up, and we just don't know. So it's a way, I think, of creating a false sense of certainty. But I'll tell you, covert contracts, the only certainty is that it's going to end badly. The question is how badly. Conversely, overt contracts always end well. Always. The problem with overt contracts is that you can't be certain that the other person is not engaging in a covert contract. You can only take responsibility for your own contract. Well, one of the challenges of being human is looking at another human being and figuring out their way of being their behavior, which of the two types of contracts it represents, because they look awfully the same on the surface. And one of the challenges of being human is the decision we all make is, are you somebody that takes a leap of trust and trust other humans that are willing to take the hurt? Are you going to be cynical and skeptical and avoid most interactions until they, over a long period of time, prove your trust? Yeah, I never liked the phrase history repeats itself when it comes to humans because it doesn't apply if the people or the person is actively working to resolve their own flaws. I do think that if people are willing to do dedicated introspective work, go into their subconscious, do the hard work, have hard conversations, and get better at hard conversations, something that I'm constantly trying to get better at. I think people can change, but they have to want to change. It does seem like deep down we all can kind of tell the difference between overt and covert. Like we have a good sense. I think one of the benefits of having this characteristic of mine where I value loyalty, I've been extremely fortunate to spend most of my life in overt relationships, and I think that creates a really fulfilling life. But there's also this thing that maybe we're in this portion of the podcast now, but I. But I'm sure this is late at night we're talking. That's right. Certainly late for me. But I'm 2 hours. I came in today on, I'm still in California. And we should also say that you came here to wish me a happy birthday. I did, I did. And the podcast is just like a fun last minute thing I suggested. Yeah. Some close friends of yours have arranged a dinner that I'm really looking forward to. I won't say which night, but it's next couple of nights. Your circadian clock is one of the most robust features of your biology. I know you can be nocturnal or you can be diurnal. We know you're mostly nocturnal at certain times of the year. Lucks. But there are very, very few people can get away with no sleep. Very few people can get away with a chaotic sleep wake schedule. So you have to obey a 24 hours, aka circadian rhythm, if you want to remain healthy of mind and body. We also have to acknowledge that it's aging isn't linear. Right? What do you mean? Well, I mean the degree of change between years 35 and 40 is not going to be the degree of change between 40 and 45. But I will say this, I'm 48 and I feel better in every aspect of my psychology and biology now than I did when I was in my twenties. Yeah, sort of quality of thought, time spent physically. I can do what I did then, which probably says more about what I could do then than what I can do now. But if you keep training, you can continue to get better. The key is to not get injured. And I've never trained super hard. I've trained hard, but I've been cautious to not, for instance, weight train more than two days in a row. I do a split, which is basically three days a week, and the other day's a run. Take one full day off, take week off every twelve to 16 weeks. I've not been the guy hurling the heaviest weights or running the furthest distance, but I have been the guy who's continuing to do it when a lot of my friends are talking about knee injuries. Hey. Talking about, hey, hey. But of course, with sport, you can't account for everything the same way you can with fitness. And I have to acknowledge that unless one is powerlifting, weightlifting and running, you can get hurt. But it's not like skateboarding, where if you, if you're going for it, you're going to get hurt. That's just, you're landing on concrete and, um, it, with jiu jitsu, like, people are trying to hurt you so that you say stop. Um, so with a sport, it's different. Um, and these days, I don't really do a sport any longer. Um, I work out, um, stay fit. I I used to continue to do sports, but I kept getting hurt. And, and frankly, now, like a rolled ankle, I may put out a little small skateboard part in 2024, because people have been saying, we want to see the kick flip. They'll say, well, I'll do a heel flip instead. But, okay, I might put out a little part because some of the guys that work on our podcast are from DC. I think by now I should at least do it just to show, like, I'm not making it up, and I probably will. But I think doing a sport is different. That's how you get hurt, overuse and doing it an actual sport. And so, you know, hat tip to those, do an actual sport. And that's a difficult decision. Like, I. A lot of people have to make. I have to make with jiu jitsu, for example. Like, if you just look empirically, I've trained really hard from all my life in grappling sports and fighting sports and all this kind of stuff, and I've avoided injury for the most part. And I would say, I would attribute that to, um, training a lot sounds counterintuitive, but training well and safely and correctly, keeping good form, saying no, and I need to say no, but training a lot and taking it seriously. Now, when this training is kind of a side, really a side thing, I find that the injury is, um, becomes a higher and higher probability when you're. Just doing it every once in a while. Every once in a while? Yeah, that. I think you said something really important that the saying no. I mean, the times I have gotten hurt training is when someone's like, hey, let's hop on this workout together, and it becomes a. Let's challenge each other to do something outrageous. Sometimes that can be fun, though. I went up to Cam Haynes gym, and he does these very high repetition weight workouts that are in circuit form. I was sore for two weeks, but I learned a lot and didn't get injured. And, yes, we ate bow hunted elk afterwards. Nice. But the injury has been a really difficult psychological thing for me. Cause. So I've injured my finger. Pinky finger. I've injured my knee. Yeah. Your kitchen is filled with splints. Splints. I'm trying to figure. I'm trying to figure out. It's like, if you look in Lex's kitchen, there's some really good snacks. I had some right before. He's very good about keeping cold drinks in the fridge, and all the water has element in it, which is great. I love that. But then there's a whole, like, hospital's worth of splints. Yeah, I'm trying. I'm trying to figure out. So here's the thing. You finger, like, pop out like this, right? Pinky finger. I'm trying to figure out, how do I splint in such a way that I can still program, still play guitar, but protect this kind of torque motion that creates a huge amount of pain. Unless you have a jujitsu injury. Jiu jitsu. But it's a. It's not the kind of. It's probably more like a skateboarding style injury, which is. It's unexpected and a silly. It's the thing that happens in a second. I didn't break my foot doing anything important. I broke my fifth minotaur stepping off a curb. So that's why they're called accidents. If you get hurt doing something awesome, that's a trophy that you have to work through. It's part of your payment to the universe. If you get hurt stepping off a curb or, you know, doing something stupid, it's called a stupid accent. Since we brought up chimp empire. Let me ask you about relationships. I think we talked about relationships. Yeah. I only date homo sapiens almost the morning meditation. The night is still young. You are human. No, but you are also an animal. Don't sell yourself short. No, I would say, listen, any discussion on the Hebrew Moon lab podcast about sexual health or anything? The critical force, consensual, age appropriate, context appropriate, species appropriate. Species appropriate. Well, can I just tell you about sexual selection? I've been watching life in color with David Attenborough. I've been watching a lot of nature documentaries, talking about inner peace. It brings me so much peace to watch nature at its worst and at its best. So life in color is a series on Netflix where it presents some of the most colorful animals on earth and kind of tells their story of how they got there through natural selection. So, you know, you have the peacock with the feathers, and it's just such incredible colors. Like, the peacock has these tail feathers, the male, that are gigantic, and they're super colorful. And there are these eyes on it. It's not eyes. It's like, I like areas. And. And they wiggle their ass, like, to show the tails. They wiggle the tails. Eye spots. The eye spots, yes. Thank you. You know, this probably way better than me. I'm just quoting it. No, continue. But it was. It's just I'm watching this, and then the female is as boring looking as pot. Like, she has no colors or nothing, but she's standing there bored just seeing this entire display. And I'm just wondering, like, the entirety of life on earth or not the entirety, post bacteria is like, in. At least in part, maybe in large part, can be described through this process of natural selection, of sexual selection. So dudes fighting and then women selecting. It seems like just the. The entirety of that series shows some incredible birds and insects and shrimp. They're all beautiful and colorful. Mantis shrimp, mantis shrimp. They're just. They're incredible. And it's all about getting laid. It's fascinating. Like, I just. And there's nothing like watching that and chimp empire to make you realize we humans, that's the same thing. That's all we're doing. And all the beautiful variety, all the bridges and the buildings and the rockets and the Internet, all of that is this kind of, is at least in part, this kind of a product of this kind of showing off for each other and all the wars and all this. Anyway. Well, there's a. Relationships. Well, right before you ask about relationship, I think what's clear is that every species, it seems animal species wants to make more of itself and protect its young. Well, to protect this young is non obvious. So not destroy enough of itself that it can't get more to reproductive competent age. I mean, I think that we have a natural. I mean, healthy people have a natural reflex to protect children. Well, I don't know. And those that can't. Wait a minute, wait a, wait, wait a minute. I've seen enough animals that are murdering the children or some other. Sure, there's even sibilicide. But first of all, I just want to say that I was delighted in your delight around animal kingdom stuff because this is a favorite theme of mine as well. But there's, for instance, some fascinating data on, for instance, for those that grew up on farms, they'll be familiar with free martins. You know about free martins? This is. They're cows that have multiple calves inside them. And there's a situation in which the calves will secrete, if there's more than one inside, will secrete chemicals that will hormonally castrate the calf next to them so they can't reproduce. So already in the womb they are fighting for future resources. That's how early this stuff can start. So it's chemical warfare in the womb against the siblings. Sometimes there's outright sibilicide. Siblings are born, they kill one another. This also becomes biblical stories, right? There are instances of cuttlefish, beautiful cephalopods, like octopuses and that is the plural as we make. That's a meme on the Internet. Oh, yeah, that became a meme or a little discussion years ago. It spread pretty quick, and now we just resurfaced it. The dismay in your voice is so amusing. In any event, that male cuttlefish will disguise themselves as female cuttlefish, infiltrate the female cuttlefish group and then mate with them. All sorts of types of covert operations. It's like a drinking game where every time we say covert in a contract in this episode, you have to take a shot of espresso. Please don't do that. You'd be dead by the end. So actually, just a small tangent. It does make me wonder how much intelligence covert contracts require. It seems like not much if you can do it in the animal kingdom, there's some kind of instinctual. It is based perhaps in like, fear. Yeah, it could be simple algorithm. If there's some ambiguity about numbers and I'm not with these guys. And then flip to the alternate strategy. I actually have a story about this that I think is relevant I used to have cuttlefish in my lab in San Diego. We went and got them from a guy out in the desert. We put them in the lab. It was amazing. And they had a postdoc who was studying prey capturing cuttlefish. They have a very ballistic, extremely rapid strike and grab of the shrimp. And we were using high speed cameras to characterize all this. Looking at binoculars, they normally have their eyes on the side of their head. When they see something they want to eat, the eyes translocate to the front, which allows them stereopsis, depth perception, allows them to strike. We were doing some unilateral eye removals. They would miss, et cetera. Okay, this has to do with eye spots. This was during a government shutdown period where the ghost shrimp that they normally feed on, that we would ship in from the gulf down here, weren't available to us. So we had to get different shrimp. And what we noticed was the cuttlefish normally would just sneak up on the shrimp. We learned this by data collection. And if the shrimp was facing them, they would do this thing with their tentacles of kind of enchanting the cuddle the shrimp. And if the shrimp wasn't facing them, they wouldn't do it, and they would ballistically grab it and eat them. Well, when we got these new shrimp, the new shrimp had eye spots on their tails. And then the cuttlefish would do this kind of attempt to enchant, regardless of the position of the ghost shrimp. So what does that mean? Okay, well, it means that there's some sort of algorithm in the cuttlefish's mind that says, okay, if you see two spots, move your tentacles, so it can be, as you pointed out, it can be a fairly simple operation, but it looks diabolical, it looks cunning, but all it is is strategy B. Yeah, but. It'S still somehow emerged. I mean, I don't think that success calling it an algorithm doesn't. I feel like, well, there's a circuit there that gets implemented in a certain context, but that circuit had to evolve. You do realize super intelligent AI will look at us humans and will say the exact thing. There's a circuit in there that evolved to do this algorithm A and algorithm B. And it's trivial. And to us humans, it's fancy and beautiful and write poetry about it. But because we don't understand the subconscious, because they want that AI algorithm cannot see into what it can't see. It doesn't understand the underworkings of what allows all of this conversation stuff to manifest. And we can't even see it. How could AI see it? Maybe it will. Maybe AI will solve and give us access to our subconscious. Maybe your AI friend or coach like I think Andreessen and others are arguing is going to happen at some point is going to say, hey Lex, you're making decisions lately that are not good for you. But it's because of this algorithm that you picked up in childhood that if you don't state your explicit needs up front, you're not going to get what you want. So why do it? From now on you need to actually make a list of every absolutely outrageous thing that you want, no matter how outrageous, and communicate that immediately. And that will work. We're talking about coefficient sexual selection. And then we went into some where do we go? Well, and you said you were excited. I was excited. Well, you were just saying what about these covert contracts and animals do them? I think it's simple contextual engagement of a neural circuit, which is not just nerd speak for saying they do a different strategy. It's saying that there has to be a circuit there. Hardwired circuit maybe learned, but probably hardwired that can be engaged, right. You can't build neural machinery out of in a moment. You need to build that circuit over time. What is building it over time? You select for it. The cuttlefish that did not have that alternate context driven circuitous didnt survive when there was a. When all the shrimp that they normally disappear and the I spotted shrimp showed up and there were a couple that had some miswiring. This is why mutation, right, x men stuff is real. They had a mutation that had some alternate wiring and that wiring got selected for it became a mutation that was adaptive as opposed to maladaptive. This is something people dont often understand about genetics, is that it only takes a few generations to devolve a trait. Make it worse. But it takes a long time to evolve an adaptive trait. There are exceptions to that, but most often that's true. So a species needs a lot of generations. We are hopefully still evolving as a species. And it takes a long time but to evolve more adaptive traits. But doesn't take long to devolve adaptive traits so that you're getting sicker or you're not functioning as well. So choose your mate wisely. And that's perhaps a good segue into sexual selection. I could tell you're good at this. Why did I bring up sexual selection? Relationships. So sexual selection in humans. I don't think you've done an episode on relationships. No, I did an episode on attachment, but not on relationships. The series with Conti includes one episode of the four. That's all about relational understanding and how to select a mate based on matching. Of drives and all the demons inside the subconscious. How to match demons, that they dance well together or what? And how generative two people are. What does that mean? Means how the way he explains it is how devoted to creating growth within the context of the family, the relationship with work. Well, let me ask you about mating rituals and how to find such a relationship. I mean, you're really big on friendships, on the value of friendships. I am. And that, I think, extends itself into one of the deepest kinds of friendships you can have, which is a romantic relationship. What mistakes, successes and wisdom can you impart? Well, I've certainly made some mistakes. I've also made some good choices in this realm. First of all, we have to define what sort of relationship we're talking about. If one is looking for a life partner, potentially somebody to establish family with, with or without kids, with or without pets. Right. Families can take different forms. I mean, I certainly experienced being a family in a prior relationship where it was the two of us and our two dogs, and it was like, it was family, like we had our little family. I think based on my experience and based on input from friends who themselves have very successful relationships, I must say I've got friends who are in long term, monogamous, very happy relationships where there seems to be a lot of love, a lot of laughter, a lot of challenge and a lot of growth. And both people, it seems, really want to be there and enjoy being there. Just to pause on that. One thing to do, I think, by way of advice, is listen to people who are in long term successful relationships. That's like, it seems dumb, but like, like we both know and are friends with Joe Rogan, who's been in a long term, really great relationship, and he's been an inspiration to me. So you take advice from that guy? Definitely. And several members of my podcast team are in excellent relationships. I think one of the things that rings true over and over again in the advice and in my experience, is find someone who's really a great friend, like, build a really great friendship with that person. Now, obviously not just a friend if we're talking romantic relationship, but, and of course, sex is super important, but it should be a part of that particular relationship alongside or meshed with the friendship. Can it be a majority of the positive exchange? I suppose it could, but I think the friendship piece is extremely important because what's required in a successful relationship clearly is joy in being together. Trust, a desire to share experience, both mundane and more adventurous, support each other, acceptance, a real, maybe even admiration, but certainly delight in being with the person. Earlier we were talking about peace, and I think that that sense of peace comes from knowing that the person you're in friendship with or that you're in romantic relationship, or ideally both, because let's assume healthy relationship, the best romantic relationship includes a friendship component with that person. It's like you just really delight in their presence, even if it's a quiet presence and you delight in seeing them delight in things. That's clear. The trust piece is huge and that's where people start. We don't want to focus on what works, not what doesn't work. But that's where I think people start engaging these covert contracts. They're afraid of being betrayed, so they betray. They're afraid of giving up too much vulnerability, so they hide their vulnerability. Or in the worst cases, they feign vulnerability again, that's a covert contract that just simply undermines everything. It becomes one plus one equals two minus one to infinity. Conversely, I think if people can have really hard conversations, this is something I've had to work really hard on in recent years that I'm still working hard on. But the friendship piece seems to be the thing that rises to the top. When I talk to friends who are in these great relationships, it's like they have so much respect and love and joy in being with their friend. It's the person that they want to spend as much of their non working, non platonic friendship time with and the person that they want to experience things with and share things with. And it sounds so kind of canned and cliche nowadays, but I think if you step back and examine how most people go about finding a relationship, sort of like, oh, like am I attracted? Of course, physical attraction is important and other forms of attraction too. And they sort of enter through that portal, which makes sense. That's the mating dance, right? That's the peacock situation. That's hopefully not the cuttlefish situation. But I think that there seems to be a history of people close to me getting into great relationships where they were friends for a while first or maybe didn't sleep together right away, that they actually intentionally deferred on, that this has not been my habit or my experience. I've gone the more I think typical, like, oh, theres an attraction like this person, theres an interest. You kind of explore all dimensions of relationship really quickly, except perhaps the moving in part and the having kids part, which ideally because its a bigger step, harder to undo without more severe consequences. But I think the whole take it slow thing I dont think is about getting to know someone slowly. I think its about that physical piece, because that does change the nature of the relationship. And I think it's because it gets right into the more hardwired, primitive circuitry around our feelings of safety, vulnerability. There's something about romantic and sexual interactions where it's almost like assets and liabilities, where people are trying to figure out how much to engage their time and their energy, and multiple people, I'm talking about from both sides, male, female or whatever sides. But where it's like assets and liabilities. And that's where it starts getting into those complicated contracts early on, I think. And so maybe that's why if a really great friendship and admiration is established first, even if people are romantically and sexually attracted to one another, then that piece can be added in a little bit later in a way that really kind of just seals up the whole thing. And then, who knows? Maybe they spend 90% of their time having sex. I don't know. Thats not for me to say or decide, obviously. But theres something there about staying out of a certain amount of risk of having to engage covert contract in order to protect oneself. But I do think love at first sight, this kind of idea is in part realizing very quickly that you are great friends. Like, I've had that interesting experience of friendship recently. Just. It's not really friendship, but like, oh, you get each other with humans. Not. Not in a romantic setting. Right. Friendship. Yeah, just friendship. But not, dare I say I felt that way about you when we met. Right. But we also. This dude's cool and he's smart and he's funny and he's driven and he's giving and he. And he's got an edge. And I want to learn from him, want to hang out with him. That was the beginning of our friendship, was essentially that set of internal realizations. Keep going, just keep going. Being a sharp dresser. Yeah, it just looks great. Shirtless on horseback. Yes. No, no. Listen. Despite what some people might say on the Internet, it's a purely platonic friendship. Somebody asked if Andrew Huberman has a girlfriend. And somebody says, I think so. And the third comment was, this really like, breaks my heart, like, that. Alex and Andrew are not an item. We are not. We are great friends, but we are not an item. It's true. It's official. I hear over and over again from friends that have made great choices and awesome partners and have these fantastic relationships for long periods of time that seem to continue to thrive. At least that's what they tell me. And that's what I observe. Establish the friendship first and give it a bit of time before sex. And so, you know, I think that's the feeling. That's the feeling. And these are. We're talking micro features and macro features. We're talking, you know, and this isn't about perfection. It's actually about the imperfections, which is kind of cool. I like quirky people. I like characters. I'll tell you where I've gone badly wrong and where I see other people going badly wrong. There is no rule that says that you have to be attracted to all attractive people by any means. It's very important to develop a sense of taste in romantic attractions. I believe what you really like in terms of a certain style, a certain way of being, and of course, that includes sexuality and sex itself, the verb, but I think it also includes their just general way of being. And when you really adore somebody, you like the way they answer the phone. And when they don't answer the phone, that way, you know something's off and you want to know. And so I think that the more you can tune up your powers of observation, not looking for things that you like, and the more that stuff just kind of washes over you, the more likely you are to, quote, unquote, fall in love. As a mutual friend of ours said to me, listen, when it comes to romantic relationships, if it's not 100% in you, it ain't happening. And I've never seen a violation of that statement where it's like, yeah, it's mostly good, and they're this. And is it like the negotiations already, it's doomed. And that doesn't mean someone has to be perfect. The relationship has to be perfect, but it's got to feel 100% inside, like, yes, yes, and yes. I think Dysaroth, when he was on here, your podcast, mentioned something that I think the words were, or maybe it was in his book, I don't recall, but that love is one of these things that we story into with somebody. We create this idea of ourselves in the future, and we look at our past time together, and then you story into it. I mean, there are very few things like that I can't story into building flying cars. I have to actually go do something. I mean, love is also retroactively constructed. I mean, anyone who's gone through a breakup understands the grief of knowing, oh, like, this is something I really shouldn't be in for whatever reason, because it only takes one. If the other person doesn't want to be in, then you shouldn't be in it. But then missing so many things, and that's just the attachment machinery, really at work. I have to ask you a question that somebody on our amazing team wanted to ask. He's happily married. Another, like you mentioned, incredible relationship. Are they good friends? Are they amazing friends? There you go. But I'm not saying who it is, so I can say some stuff, which is, it started out as a great sexual connection. Oh, well, there you go. But then became very close friends after that. Listen. There you go. So, speaking of sex to Rome, he. Has a wonderful son, and he is wanting to have a second kid. And he wanted to ask the great Andrew Huberman, is there like, sexual positions or any kind of thing that can help maximize the chance that they have a girl versus a boy? Because they had a wonderful boy, they want a girl. Is there a way to control the gender? This has been debated for a long time, and I did a four and a half hour episode on fertility. And the reason I did a four and a half hour episode on fertility is that, first of all, I find that reproductive biology be fascinating. And I wanted a resource for people that were thinking about or struggling with having kids, for whatever reason. And it felt important to me to combine the male and female components in the same episode. It's all timestamps, so you don't have to listen to the whole thing. We talk about ivf and vitro fertilization. We talk about natural pregnancy. Okay. The data on position is very interesting, but let me just say a few things. There are a few clinics now, in particular, some out of the United States, that are spinning down sperm and finding that they can separate out fractions, as they're called. You know, they can spin the sperm down at a given speed, and they'll separate out at different, um, sort of depths within the test tube that allow them to pull out the sperm on top or below and bias the probability towards male or female births. It's not perfect, it's not 100%. It's a very costly procedure. It's still very controversial. Now, with in vitro fertilization, you can extract eggs. You can do introduce a sperm directly by pipette in process called icSi, or you can set up a sperm race in a dish. And if you get a number of different embryos, meaning the eggs get fertilized, duplicate, and start form a blastocyst, which is a ball of cells, early embryo. Then you can do karyotyping. So you can look for xx or xy, select the xy, which then would give rise to a male offspring and implant that one. So there is that kind of sex selection with respect to position. There's a lot of lore that if the woman is on top or the woman's on the bottom, or whether or not the penetration is from behind, whether or not it's going to be male or female offspring. And frankly, the data are not great, as you can imagine, because those would be interesting studies to run. Perhaps. There is studies. There is paper, there are some, but they're not. I guess there's more lore than science. And there's a lot of. And there are a lot of other variables that are hard to control. So, for instance, if it's ejaculation during intermission, during the. During sex penetration, et cetera, then you can't measure, for instance, sperm volume as opposed to when it's ivf. And they can actually measure how many milliliters, how many forward motile sperm. It's hard to control for certain things and just can vary between individuals and even from one ejaculation to the next. Okay, so there's too many variables. However, the position thing is interesting in the following way, and then I'll answer whether or not you can bias towards a female. As long as we're talking. I have other questions about sex, but. As long as we're talking about sexual position, there are data that support the idea that in order to increase the probability of successful fertilization, that indeed, the woman should not stand upright after sex and should right after. Right after the man has ejaculated inside her and should adjust her pelvis, say, 15 degrees upwards. I mean, some of the fertility experts, mds, will say that's crazy, but others that I sought out, and not specifically for this answer, but for researching that episode, said that, yeah, what you're talking about is trying to get the maximum number of sperm, and it's contained in semen. And yes, the semen can leak out. And so keeping the pelvis tilted for about 15 degrees, for about 15 minutes, obviously tilted in the direction that would have things running upstream, not downstream, so to speak, would. Gravity. It's real, you know, so. So for maximizing fertilization, you know, the. The doctors I spoke to just said, look, given that if people are trying to get pregnant, what is spending 15 minutes on their back? You know, this sort of thing. Okay, so then with respect to female getting a female offspring or xx female offspring selectively. There is the idea that as fathers get older, they're more likely to have daughters as opposed to sons. From the papers I've read is a significant, but still mildly significant result. So with each passing year, this person increases the probability they're going to have a daughter, not a son. So that's interesting, but the probability differences are probably tiny. I mean, it's not, you know, it's a significant, it's not trivial, it's not a trivial difference. But if they want to ensure having a daughter, then they should do IVF and select an xx embryo. And when you go through IVF, they genetically screen them for karyotype, which is xxxyde, and they look at mutations, genotypic mutations, for things like, you know, trisomies and aneuploidies, all the stuff you don't want. But there is a lot of lore, if you look on the Internet, sure. Different foods. So there are a lot of variables. There's a lot of. But there haven't been systematic studies. So I think probably the best thing to do, unless they're going to do IVF, is just, you know, roll the dice and, you know, I think with each passing year they increase the probability of getting a female offspring. But of course, with each passing year, the egg and sperm quality degrade. So get after it soon. So I went down a rabbit hole. There's like sexology, there's journals. Oh yeah, on sex. Sure. Okay. And some of them not all quite reputable, and some of them really pioneering in the sense that. But they've taken on topics that are considered outside the mainframe of what people talk about, but they're very important. We have episodes coming out soon with, for instance, the head of male urology, sexual health and reproductive health at Stanford, Michael Eisenberg, but also one with a female urologist, sexual health reproductive health doctor Reena Malik, who has a quite active YouTube presence. She does these really dry scientific presentation, but very nice. She has a lovely voice, but she'll be talking about erections or squirting or all this. She does very Internet type content, but she's a legitimate urologist, reproductive health expert. And in the podcast we did talk about both male and female orgasm. We talked a lot about sexual function dysfunction. We talked a lot about pelvic floor. One interesting factoid is that only 3% of sexual dysfunction is hormonal endocrine in nature. It's more often related to some pelvic floor or vasculature, blood flow related or other issue and then when Eisenberg came on the podcast, he said that far less sexual dysfunction is psychogenic in origin than people believe. That far more of it is pelvic floor, neuro and vascular. So there are the myths of. I mean, it's not saying that psychogenic dysfunction doesn't exist, but that a lot of the sexual dysfunction that people assume is related to hormones or that is related to psychogenic issues are related to vascular or neural issues. And the good news is that there are great remedies for those. Both those episodes detail some of the more salient points around what those remedies are and could be one of the, again, factoids. But it was interesting that a lot of people have pelvic floor issues and they think that their pelvic floors are messed up. They go on the Internet, they learn about kegels, kegels. It turns out that some people need kegels. They need to strengthen their pelvic floor. Guess what? A huge number of people with sexual and urologic dysfunction have pelvic floors that are too tight, and kegels are going to make them far worse, and they actually need to learn to relax their pelvic floor. And so seeing a pelvic floor specialist is important. I think in the next 510 years, were going to see a dramatic shift towards more discussion about sexual and reproductive health in a way that acknowledges that, yeah, the clitoris comes from the same origin tissue as the penis. And in many ways, the neural innervation of the two, while clearly different, has some overlapping features that there's going to be discussion around anatomy and hormones and pelvic floors in a way that's going to erode some of the cloaking of these topics, because they've been cloaked for a long time. And there's a lot of, like, well, let's just call it what is. There's a lot of bullshit out there about what's what. And now the hormonal issues, by the way, just to clarify, can impact desire. So a lot of people who have lack of desire as opposed to lack of anatomical function, this could be male or female, that. That can originate with either things like SSRI's or hormonal issues. And so we talk about that as well. So it's a pretty vast topic. Okay. You're one of the most productive people I know. What's the secret to your productivity? How do you maximize the number of productive hours in a day? You're a scientist, you're a teacher, you're a very prolific educator. Well, thanks for the kind words. I struggle like everybody else, but I am pretty relentless about meeting deadlines. I miss them sometimes, but sometimes that means cramming, sometimes that means starting early. But has that been hard? Sorry to interrupt. With the podcast, there are certain episodes, I mean, you're like taking just incredibly difficult topics and you know, they're going to be, there's going to be a lot of really good scientists listening to those with a very skeptical and careful eye. Like how hard do you struggle meeting that deadline? Sometimes, yes. We've pushed out episodes because I want more time with them. I also, I haven't advertised this, but I have another fully tenured professor that's started checking my podcasts and helping me find papers. He's a close friend of mine. He's an incredible expert in neuroplasticity and that's been helpful. But I research all my, I do all the primary research for the episodes myself. Although my niece has been doing a summer internship with me and finding amazing papers she did last summer as well. She's really good at it. Just sick, that kid on the Internet. And she gets great stuff. Casket just going on tangents here. What's the hardest? Finding the papers or understanding what a. Paper is saying or finding the best papers? Yeah, because you have to read a bunch of reviews, figure out who's getting cited, call people in a field, make sure that this is the stuff. I mean, I did this episode recently on ketamine. About ketamine. I wasn't on ketamine. And there's this whole debate about S versus Ark Sr ketamine. And I called two clinical experts at Stanford. I had a researcher at UCLA help me. Even then, a few people had gripes about it. I don't think they understood a section that I was perhaps could have been clearer about. But yeah, you're always concerned that people won't either won't get it or I won't be clear. So the researching is mainly about finding the best papers. And then I'm looking for papers that establish a thoroughness of understanding that are interesting. Obviously it's fun to get occasionally look at some of the odder or more progressive papers that are what's new in a field and then where there are actionable takeaways to really and export those with a lot of thoughtfulness. I mean, I think that going back to the productivity thing, I do, I get up, I look at the sun. I don't stare at the sun, but I get my sunshine. It all starts with a really good night's sleep. I think that's really important to understand. So much so that if I wake up and I don't feel rested enough, I'll often do a non sleep, deep rest, yoga, nidra, or go back to sleep for a little bit, get up, really prioritize one big block of work for the thing that I'm researching. I think a little bit of anxiety and a little bit of concern about deadline helps. Turning the phone off helps realizing that those peak hours, whenever they are for you, you do not allow those hours to be invaded unless there's a, you know, a nuclear bomb goes off. And a nuclear bomb is just a phraseology for it could be family crisis would be, you know, would be good justification if there's an emergency, obviously. But, um, it's all about focus. It's all about focus in the moment. It's not even so much about how many hours you log. It's really about focus in the moment. How much total focus can you give to something? And then I like to take walks and think about things and sometimes talk about them in my voice recorder. So I'm just always churning on it all the time. And then, of course, learning to turn it off and engage with people socially and not be podcasting 24 hours a day in your head is key. But I think I love learning and researching and finding those papers and the information, and I love teaching it. And these days I use a whiteboard before I start. I don't have any notes, no teleprompter. Then the whiteboard that I use beforehand is to really sculpt out the different elements and the flow. Get the flow right and move things around. The whiteboard is such a valuable tool. Then take a couple pictures of that. When I'm happy with it, put it down on the desk. And these are just bullet points. And then just churn through. And just churn through. And nothing feels better than researching and sharing information. And as you did, I grew up writing papers, and it's hard, and I like the friction of, like, can't, you know, I want to get up when you use the bathroom. When I was in the college, I was trying to make up deficiencies from my lack of attendance in high school, so much so that I would set a timer. I wouldn't let myself get up to use the bathroom, even. Never had an accident. But I was, you know, I mean, it was like I listened to music, classical music, rancid, a few other things, some Bob Dylan maybe thrown in there and just study and just. And it felt. And then you hit the two hour mark. And you're ahead. Pain. And then you get up, like, use the bathroom. Like, that felt so good. There's something about the human brain that likes these kind of friction points and working through them, and you just have to work through them. So, yeah, I'm productive, and my life is arranged around it. And, you know, that's been a bit of a barrier to personal life at times, but my life's been arranged around it. I've set up everything so that I can learn more, teach more, including, you know, some of my home life, and. But I do, you know, still watch chimpanzee, still got time to watch Jim Papa, look. The great Joe Strummer. Right? Clash. Or my favorite, mescaleros. He said, you know, this famous strummer quote, no input, no output. So you need. You need experience. You need outside things in order to foster the process. But, uh, yeah, just nose to the grindstone, man. I don't. I don't know. And that's what. And that's what I'm happy to do with my life. I don't think anyone should do that just because. But this is how I'm showing up. And, you know, if you don't like me, then scroll. Whether they say swipe left, swipe right. I don't know. I'm not on the apps, the dating apps. So that's the other thing I keep waiting for when, um, listens to Lex Freeman podcast is a checkbox on, like, hinge or bumble or whatever it is. But I don't even know are those that are field. I don't know what the. What are the apps now? I've never used an app, and I always found troublesome how little information is provided on apps. Well, they're the ones that are, like, a stocked lake, like Raya. You know, it's like they sort of, like companies will actually fill them with people that look a certain way, and. Soon it'll be filled with Aihdem. Oh, yeah, that's what you said. Oh, that's a heartbreak within that. Well, I. You know, I'm guilty of liking real human interaction. Have you tried AI interaction? No, but I have a feeling you're gonna convince me to one day. Yeah. I've also struggled finishing projects that are new. There are some. Something new. Like, for example, some. One of the things that really struggled finishing is something that's in Russian, that requires translation and overdub and all that kind of stuff. The other project I've been working on for, like, over at least a year and off and on. But trying to finish is something we've talked about in the past is. I'm still on it. Project on Hitler in World War Two. I've written so much about it, and I just don't know why I can't finish it. I have trouble. Like, really. I think I'm terrified being in front of the camera like this. Like this or so. Well, actually, no, no. Solo. Well, if you want to do solo. And seriously, because we've done this before, right? Our clandestine study missions. I'll. I'm happy to sit in the corner and work on my book or do something if you want to, if it. Feels good, just for the feeling of somebody else. Definitely. What do you. I mean, how do you. You don't seem to. You seem to have been fearless to just sit in front of the camera by yourself to do the episode. Yeah, it was weird. I mean, the first year of the podcast, it just spilled out of me. It was just. I had all that stuff I was so excited about. I'd been talking to everyone who would listen, and anyone even went, who. They'd run away. I'd keep talking, you know, before there was ever a camera, wasn't on social media. 2019. I posted a little bit 2020, as you know, started going on podcasts. But, yeah, I had. So I just. I just. The zest and delight in this stuff. It's like circadian rhythms. I'm going to tell you about this stuff. I just felt like here was the opportunity and just let it burst. And then as we've gotten into topics that are a little bit further away from my home knowledge, you know, I still get super excited about it. It's music in the brain episode I've been researching for a while now. I'm just so hyped about it. It's so, so interesting. There's so many facets. Singing versus improv, improvisational. Excuse me, music versus. I'm listening to music versus learning music. I mean, it just goes on and on. There's just so much that's so interesting. I just can't get enough. And I think, I don't know. You put a camera in front of me, I sort of forget about it, and I'm just trying to just teach. Yeah. So that's a different. That's interesting. I mean, forget the camera. Maybe I need to find that joy as well. But, like, for me, a lot of the joys in the. In the writing and the camera, there's something. Well, the best lecturers, as you know, and you're a phenomenal lecturer. So you embody this as well. But when I teach at Stanford, I was directing this course in neuroanatomy and neuroscience and for medical students, and I noticed that the best lecturers would come in and they're teaching the material from a place of deep understanding, but they're also experiencing it as a first time learner at the same time. So it's just sort of embodying the delight of it, but also the authority over the. Not authority, but the sort of mastery of the material. And it's really the delight in it that the students are linking onto. And of course, they need and deserve the best accurate material, so they have to know what they're talking about. But yeah, just tap into that energy of learning and loving it and people are along for the ride. Or, you know, I get accused of being long winded, but, you know, things get taken out of context that leads to greater misunderstanding. And also I look at, listen, I come from a lineage of three dead advisors. Three, all three. So I don't know when the reaper is coming for me. I'm doing my best to stay alive a long time, but whether or not it's a bullet or a bus or cancer or whatever, or just old age, I mean, I'm trying to get it all out there as best I can. And if it means you have to hit pause and come back a day or two later, that seems like a reasonable compromise to me. I'm not going to go go longer than I need to, and I'm trying to shorten them up. But again, that's kind of how I show up. It's like Tim Armstrong would say about writing songs. I asked him, do you write? How often do you write? Every day. Every day. Has Rick ever stopped creating? No. Has Joe ever stopped preparing for comedy? Are you ever stopping to think about world issues and technology and who you can talk to? I mean, it seems to me you've always got a plan. The inside. The thing I love about your podcast the most, to be honest these days, is the surprise of like, I don't know who the hell is going to be there. It's almost like, like I get a little nervously excited about when a new episode comes. Like, no idea. No idea. And, you know, I mean, I have some guesses based on what you told me during the break. I mean, you've got some people where it's just like, whoa, Lex has went there. Awesome. Can't wait to click. I think that's really cool. You're constantly surprising people, so you're doing it so. Well, it's such a high level. And I think it's also important for people to understand that what you're doing, Lex, there's no precedent for it. Sure, there have been interviews before, there have been podcasts before. There are discussions before, but it's not like how many of your peers can you look to to find out how best to do the content like yours? Zero. There's one peer, you. And so that should give you great peace and great excitement because you're a pioneer. You're literally the tip of the spear. I don't want to take an unnecessary tangent, but I think this might thread together two of the things that we've been talking about, which are, I think, of pretty key importance. One is romantic relationships and the other is creative process and work. And this, again, is something I learned from Rick, but that he and I have gone back and forth on and that I think is worth elaborating on, which is earlier we were saying the best relationship is going to be one where it brings you peace. I think peace also can be translated to, among other things, lack of distraction. So when you're with your partner, can you really focus on them and the relationship? Can you not be distracted by things that you're upset about from their past or from your past with them? And of course, the same is true for them, right? They ideally will feel that way towards you, too. They can really focus. Also, when you're not with them, can you focus on your work? Can you not be worried about whether or not they're okay because you trust that they're an adult and they can handle things, or they will reach out if they need things, they're going to communicate their needs, like an adulthood, but not creating messes just to get attention and things like that, or disappearing for that matter. So peace and focus are intimately related, and distraction is the enemy of peace and focus. So there's something there, I believe, because with people that have the strong generative drive and want to be productive in their home life, in the sense they have a rich family life or partner life, whatever that is, and in their work life, the ability to really drop into the work and like, okay, you might have that sense, like, I hope they're okay or need to check my phone or something, but just know we're good. So peace and focus, I think, and being present are so key. And it's key at every level of romantic relationship, from certainly presence and focus, everything from sex to listening to raising a family to tending to the house and in work, it's absolutely critical. So I think that those things are kind of mirror images of the same thing and they're both important reflections of the other. And when you start to, when work is not going well, then the focus on relationship can suffer and vice versa. And it's crazy how important that is, how incredibly wonderful it could be to have a person in your life that kind of enables that creative focus. Yeah. And you supply the peace and focus for their endeavors, whatever those might be. I mean, that symmetry there, because clearly people have different needs and the need to just really trust. When Lex is working, he's in his generative mode and I know he's good. And so then they feel sure they've contributed to that. But then also what you're doing is supporting them in whatever way it happens to be. And I think that sometimes you'll see that people will pair up along, creative, creative or musical, musical or computer scientists. But I think, again, going back to this Conti episode on relationships, that the superficial labels are less important, it seems, than just the desire to create that kind of home life and relationship together. And as a consequence, the work mode. And for some people, both people aren't working and sometimes they are. But I think that's the good stuff and I think that's the big learning in all of it, is that the further along I go with each birthday, I guarantee you're going to be like, what I want is simpler and simpler and harder and harder to create, but oh, so worth it. The inner and the outer piece. It's been over two years, I think, since Costello passed away. It still tears me up. I cried about him today. I cried about him today. It's proportional to the love. But yeah, I'll cry about right now. If I think about it wasn't putting him down, it wasn't the act of him dying, any of that. Actually, that was a beautiful experience. I didn't expect it to be, but it was in my place when I was living in Topanga during the pandemic where we launched the podcast. And I did it at home and he hated the vet, so I did it at home and he gave out this huge right at the end. And I could just tell he had been in just not a lot of pain, fortunately, but he had just been working so hard just to move at all. And the craziest thing happened, Lex. It was unbelievable. I've never had an experience like this. I expected my heart to break and I've felt a broken heart before. I felt it, frankly, when my parents split, I felt it when Harry shot himself. I felt it when Barbara died and felt it when, you know, when Ben went so, as well and so many friends, like, way too many friends. I mean, the end of 2017, my friend Aaron King, Johnny Fair, John Eickleberry, stomach cancer, suicide, fentanyl. It's like, whoa. All in a frigging week. And I just remember thinking like, what the. But when? Like, and it's just heartbreaking. You just carry that and it's like, uh. But, and that's just a short list, you know? And I don't say that for sob stories, just for a guy that wasn't in the military or didn't grow up in the inner city. Like, it's an unusual number of, like, deaths. Like, close people. When Costello went, the craziest thing happened. My heart warmed up. It heated up and I wasn't on MDMA and I wasn't. I was just. The moment he went, he just went whoosh. And I was like, what the hell is this? And it was just, it was like a supernatural experience to me. I just never had that. I put my grandfather on the ground. I was a pallbearer at the funeral. I've done that more times than I'd like to have ever done it. And it just heated up with Costello and I thought, what the fuck is this? And it was almost like, and you can make up these, we make up these stories about what it is, but it was almost like he was like, all right, I have to be careful because I will cry here and I don't want to. It was almost like he was like all that effort because I put in putting so much effort into him. I was like, all right, you get that back. It was like the giant friggin thank you. And it was incredible, you know? And I'm not embarrassed to shed a tear or two about it if I have to. Like, I was like, holy shit. Like, that's how close I was to that animal. Where do you think? Where do you think you can find that kind of love again, man? I don't know. I mean, when. Excuse me for welling up, but it was just, I mean, it's a frigging dog, right? I get it. But for me, it was the first real home I ever had. But when Costello went, it was like, we had had this home in Topanga, we had set it up and we're like. And he was just so happy there. And I think it just, I don't know, it was like this weird victory slash massive loss. We did it eleven years fucking did everything, everything to make him as comfortable as possible. And he was super loyal, beautiful, animal, but also just funny and fun. And I was like, I did it. I gave as much of myself to this being as a human. I felt I could without making it detracting from the rest of my life. And so I don't know. When I think about Barbara especially, I well up, and it's hard for me. I mean, I talked to her before she died, and that was a brutal conversation, saying goodbye to someone, especially with kids, and that was hard. I think that really flipped a switch in me where I'm like, I always knew I wanted kids. I'd say, I want kids. I want a lot of kids. That flipped a switch in me. I was like, I want kids. I want my own kids. You might be able to find that kind of love. Yeah, I think because it was the caretaker, it wasn't about what he gave me all that time. And the more I could take care of him and see him happy, the better I felt. It was crazy, and. I don't know. So I miss him every day. Every day. I miss him every day. You got a heart that's so full of love. I can't wait for you to have kids, you to be a father. Yeah. I can't wait to do this. When I'm ready for it, you know? When God decides I'm ready, I'll have. Him, and then I will still beat you to it. As I told you many times before. I think you should absolutely have kids. I mean, look at the people in our life, because we're kind of the. In case you haven't realized it already, like, we're the younger of the podcasters, but, you know, like Joe and I, Peter and Sagura and, you know, and the rest. Right? They're like the. They're like the tribal elders, right? And we're, you know, we're not the youngest in the crew, but we're. If you look at all those guys, they all have kids. They all adore their kids, and their kids bring tremendous meaning to their life. Like, be. We'd be morons if, you know, if you didn't go off and start a family. I didn't start off star family. And, yeah, I think that's. That's the goal. I mean, I think of the goals. That's one of them. The kids not only make them their life more joyful and brings love to their life, it also makes them more productive, makes them better people. All that. It's like, it's it's kind of obvious. Yeah, I think that's what Costello wanted. I think I have this story in my head that he was so like, okay, like, take this. Like, yeah, yeah. And don't. And lord knows, don't fuck this up. Andrew, brother, this is incredible. Love you too. Thanks. I appreciate you. Let's. We will talk often on each other's podcasts for many years to come. Yes, many, many years to come. Thank you. Thanks for. For having me on here. And there are no words for how much I appreciate your example and your friendship. So love you, brother. Love you too. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Andrew Huberman. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Albert Camus. In the midst of winter I found there was within me an invincible summer and that makes me happy for it says that no matter how hard the world pushes against me, within me there is something stronger, something better pushing right back. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.

Utterances:
Speaker A: Listen, when it comes to romantic relationships, if it's not 100% in you, it ain't happening. And I've never seen a violation of that statement where it's like, yeah, it's mostly good, and they're this. And is it like the negotiations already? It's doomed. And that doesn't mean someone has to be perfect. The relationship has to be perfect. But it's got to feel 100% inside, like, yes, yes, and yes.
Speaker B: The following is a conversation with my dear friend Andrew Huberman, his fourth time on this podcast. It's my birthday, so this is a special birthday episode of sorts. Andrew flew down to Austin just to wish me a happy birthday, and we decided to do a podcast last second. We literally talked for hours beforehand and a long time after, late into the night. He's one of my favorite human beings. Brilliant scientist, incredible teacher, and a loyal friend. I'm grateful for Andrew. I'm grateful for good friends, for all the support and love I've gotten over the past few years. I'm truly grateful for this life, for the years, the days, the minutes, the seconds I've gotten to live on this beautiful earth of ours. I really don't want to leave just yet. I think I'd really like to stick around. I love you all. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. And now, dear friends, here's Andrew Huberman.
Speaker A: Trying to run a little bit more.
Speaker B: Are you losing weight?
Speaker A: I'm not trying to lose weight, but I always do the same fitness routine after, like, 30 years. Basically lift three days a week, run three days a week. But one of the runs is a long run, one of them is medium. One of them is a sprint type thing. So what I've decided to do this year was just extend the duration of the long run. And I like being mobile. I never want to be so heavy that I can't move. I want to be able to go out and run 10 miles if I have to. So sometimes I do, and I want to be able to sprint if I have to. So sometimes I do. And lifting in objects feels good. It feels good to train like a lazy bear and just lift heavy objects. But I've also started training with lighter weights and higher repetitions and for three month cycles, and it gives your joints a rest. And, um, yeah, so probably, you know, it. I think it also is interesting to see how training differently changes your cognition. That's probably hormone related, you know, hormones downstream of training heavy versus hormones downstream of training a little bit lighter. Um, I think my cognition is better when I'm doing more cardio. And when the repetition ranges are a little bit, um, higher. Which is not to say that people who lift heavy are dumb, but there is a cause. There's real value in lifting heavy.
Speaker B: There's a lot of angry people listening to this right now.
Speaker A: No, no, no. But lifting heavy and then taking three to five minutes rest is far and away a different challenge than running hard for 90 minutes. That's a tough thing. Just like getting in an ice bath. People say, oh, well, how is that any different than working out? Um, well, there are a lot of differences, but one of them is that it's very acute stress. Within 1 second, you're stressed. So I think subjecting the body to a bunch of different types of stressors in space and time is really valuable. So, yeah, I've been playing with the variables in a pretty systematic way.
Speaker B: Well, I like long and slow for, like you said, the impact it has on my cognition.
Speaker A: Yeah. The wordlessness of it, the way it puts you in, the way it seems to clean out the clutter.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: You know, it can take away that hyper focus and put you more in a relaxed focus for sure.
Speaker B: Well, for me, it brings the clutter to the surface at first. Like, all these thoughts come in there, and then they dissipate. You know, I've been. Because I got knee barred pretty hard. That's when somebody tries to break your knee.
Speaker A: That was a knee bar. They try and break your knee. Oh, yeah. So you tap. So they.
Speaker B: Yeah, yeah, yeah. So it's, you know, hyper extend the knee that direction. It got knee barred pretty hard. So, um, in ways I don't understand, it kind of hurts to run. I don't understand what's happening behind there. I need to investigate this. It basically, this, the hamstring flex, like curling your leg hurts a little bit.
Speaker A: Okay.
Speaker B: And that results in this weird, dull, but sometimes extremely sharp pain in the back of the knee. So I'm. I'm work. I'm working through this anyway. But walking doesn't hurt. So I've been playing around with walking recently, like, for 2 hours and thinking. Cause I know a lot of, like, smart people throughout history have walked and thought, and you have to, like, you know, play with things that have worked for others, not just to exercise, but to, like, integrate this very light, kind of prolonged exercise into a productive life. So they do all their thinking while they walk. It's like a meditative type of walking. And it's really interesting. It really works.
Speaker A: Yeah. The practice I've been doing a lot more of lately is I walk while reading a book in the yard. I'll just pace back and forth or walk in a circle.
Speaker B: Audiobook or. Are you talking.
Speaker A: No, hard to. Hard copy.
Speaker B: Were you just holding.
Speaker A: I'm holding the book and I'm walking and I'm reading. Yeah. And I usually have a pen and I'm underlining. I have this whole system, like underlining stars, exclamation points. Goes back to University of what things that will go back to which things I export to notes and that kind of thing. But from the beginning, when I opened my lab at that time in San Diego, before I moved back to Stanford, I would have meetings with my students or postdocs by just walking in the field behind the lab, you know, and I'd bring my bulldog Costello. Bulldog mastiff at the time, and he was a slow walker. So these were slow walks. But I can think much more clearly that way. There's a Nobel Prize winning professor at Columbia University School of Medicine, Richard Axel, who, who won the Nobel Prize, co won the Nobel Prize with Linda Buck for the discovery of the molecular basis of olfaction. And he walks in, voice dictates his papers. And now with Rev or these other. Maybe there are better ones than rev where you can convert audio files into text very quickly and then edit from there. So I will often voice dictate first drafts and things like that. And I totally agree on the long runs, the walks, the integrating that with cognitive work, harder to do with sprints. And then the gym, you kNow, are you, you weight TraIn, you just seem naturally strong and like thicker jointed. It's true. Yeah, it's true. I mean, we did the one very beginner. Cause I'm a very beginner of jujitsu class TogEtHER. And, yeah, as I mentioned then what if people missed it? Lex, it's freakishly strong.
Speaker B: I think I was born genetically to hug people.
Speaker A: Oh, like costello.
Speaker B: Exactly.
Speaker A: You guys have a certain similarity. He had wrists like, you know, it's like you and Jaco and Costello have these like wrists and elbows that are super thick, you know, and then when you look around, you see tremendous variation. You know, some people have like the. The wrist width of a whippet or Woody Allen, and then other People like you or Jocko or, you know, there's this one Jaco video or thing on GQ or something. Have you seen the comments on Jaco? These are the best. No, the comments. I love the comments on YouTube. Cause occasionally they're funny. The best is when Jaco was born, the doctor looked at his parents and said, it's a man, like Chuck Norris type comments. Oh yeah, those are great. That's what I miss about Rogan being on YouTube with the full length episode. Oh, the comments.
Speaker B: So this is technically a birthday podcast. What do you love most about getting older?
Speaker A: It's like the confirmation that comes from getting more and more data, which basically says, yeah, the first time you thought that thing, it was actually right, because the second, third, and fourth and fifth time it turned out the exact same way. In other words, there have been a few times in my life where I did not feel easy about something. I felt a signal from my body, this is not good. And I didn't trust it early on, but I knew it was there. And then two or three bad experiences later, I'm able to say, ah, every single time there was a signal from the body informing my mind, this is not good. Now, the reverse has also been true that there have been a number of instances in which I feel sort of immediate delight. And there's this kind of almost astonishingly simple experience of feeling comfortable with somebody or at peace with something or delighted at an experience. And it turns out all, literally all of those experiences and people turned out to be experiences and people that are still in my life and that I still delight in every day. In other words, what's great about getting older is that you stop questioning the signals that come from the, I think, deeper recesses of your nervous system to say, hey, this is not good. Or, hey, this is great. More of this. Whereas I think in my teens, my twenties, my thirties, I'm 40, almost 48, I'll be 48 next month. I didn't trust, I didn't listen. I actually put a lot of work into overriding those signals and learning to fight through them, thinking that somehow that was making me tougher or somehow that was making smarter, when in fact, in the end, those people that you meet that are difficult or there are other names for it, in the end, you're like, yeah, that person's a piece of shit, or, this person is amazing and they're really wonderful. And I felt that from go.
Speaker B: So you've learned to trust your gut versus the influences of other people's opinions.
Speaker A: I've learned to trust my gut versus the, uh, the forebrain. Overanalysis. Overriding the gut. Other people often in my life have had great optics, right? I've benefited tremendously from an early age of being in a large community of what has been mostly guys. But I have some close female friends and always have as well, who will tell me that that's a bad decision, or this person not so good, or be careful, or they're great, or that's great. So oftentimes, my community and the people around me have been more aligned with the correct choice than knowledge.
Speaker B: Really?
Speaker A: Yes, really.
Speaker B: When you were younger, like transparents and.
Speaker A: So on, I don't recall ever really listening to my parents that much. I grew up in a, you know, we don't have to go back to my childhood thing, but my sense was that. Thank you. I learned that recently in a psilocybin journey, my first high dose psilocybin journey, which was, welcome back. Done with a clinician. Thank you very much. Thank you. I was worried there for a second at one point in my not coming back back. But in any event, yeah, I grew up with some wild kids. I would say about a third of my friends from childhood are dead or in jail. About a third have gone on to do tremendously impressive things, start companies, excellent athletes, academics, scientists and clinicians. And then about a third are living their lives as kind of more typical. I just mean that they are happy family people with jobs, that they mainly serve the function to make money. They're not sort of career into their career for career's sake. So some of my friends early on gave me some bad ideas, but most of the time, my bad ideas came from overriding the signals that I knew that my body and I, I would say my body and brain were telling me to obey. And I say body and brain is that theres this brain region, the insula, which does many things, but it represents our sense of internal sensation, interoception. And I was talking to Paul Conti about this, who, as you know, I respect tremendously. I think hes one of the smartest people ive ever met, I think for different reasons. He and Mark Andreessen are some of the, the smartest people I've ever met. But Paul's level of insight into the human psyche is absolutely astounding. And he says the opposite of what most people say about the brain, which is most people say, oh, the supercomputer of the brain is the forebrain. It's like a monkey brain with extra real estate put on there. And the forebrain is what makes us human and gives us our superpowers. Paul has said, and he's done a whole series on mental health that's coming out from our podcast in September. So this is not an attempt to plug that, but he'll elaborate on what I'm saying.
Speaker B: Wait, you're doing a thing with Paul.
Speaker A: We already did. Yeah. So, Paul.
Speaker B: Oh, nice.
Speaker A: Yeah. So Paul Conti shot up. He and I sat down. He did a four episode series on mental health. This is not mental illness. Mental health about how to explore one's own subconscious, explore the self, build and cultivate the generative drive. You'll learn more about what that is from him. He's far more eloquent and clear than I am. And he provides, essentially, a set of steps to explore the self that does not require that you work with a therapist. This is self exploration that is rooted in psychiatry, it's rooted in neuroscience, and I don't think this information exists anywhere else. I'm not aware that it exists anywhere else. And he essentially distills it all down to one, eight, five by eleven sheet, which we provide for people. And he says there, I don't want to give too much away because I would detract from what he does so beautifully, but if I tried, and I wouldn't accomplish it anyway. But he said, and I believe that the subconscious is the supercomputer of the brain, all the stuff working underneath our conscious awareness that's driving our feelings and what we think are the decisions that we've thought through so carefully, and that only by exploring the subconscious and understanding it a little bit can we actually improve ourselves over time. And I agree. I think that. So that the mistake is to think, that thinking can override it all. It's a certain style of introspection in thinking that allows us to read the signals from our body, read the signals from our brain, integrate the knowledge that we're collecting about ourselves, and. And to use all that in ways that are really adaptive and generative for us.
Speaker B: What do you think is there in that subconscious? What do you think of the jungian shadow? What's there?
Speaker A: There's this idea you're familiar with, too, I'm sure, that this jungian idea that we all have all things inside of us, that all of us have the capacity to be evil, to be good, et cetera, but that some people express one or the other to a greater extent. But he also mentioned that there's a unique category of people, maybe two to 5% of people, that don't just have all things inside of them, but they actually spend a lot of time exploring a lot of those things, the darker recesses, the shadows, their own shadows. I'm somebody who's drawn to goodness and to light and to joy and all those things like anybody else, but I think maybe it was part of how I grew up, maybe it was the crowd I was with. But then again, even when I started spending more time with academics and scientists, you see shadows in other ways. You see pure ambition with no passion. I recall a colleague in San Diego who, it was very clear to me, did not actually care about understanding the brain. But understanding the brain was just his avenue to exercise ambition. And if you gave him something else to work on, he'd work on that. In fact, he did. He left and he worked on something else. I realized he has no passion for understanding the brain like all the, I assumed all scientists do, certainly why I went into it. But some people, it's just raw ambition. It's about winning. It doesn't even matter what they win, which to me is crazy. But I think that's a shadow that some people explore. Not one I've explored. I think the shadow parts of us are very important to come to understand and look better to understand them and know that they're there and work with them than to not acknowledge their presence and have them surface in the form of addictions or behaviors that damage us in other people.
Speaker B: So one of the processes for achieving mental health is to bring those things to the surface. So fish the subconscious mind.
Speaker A: Yes. And Paul describes ten cupboards that one can look into for exploring the self. There's the structure of self and the function of self. Again, this will all be spelled out in this series in a lot of detail. Terms of its relational aspect between people, how to pick good partners and good relationship. Gets really into this from a very different perspective. Yeah, fascinating stuff. I was just sitting there, just, I will say this, that that four episode series with Paul is at least to date, the most important work I've ever been involved in in all of my career, because it's very clear that we are not taught how to explore our subconscious and that very few people actually understand how to do that, even most psychiatrists. He mentioned something about psychiatrists. You know, if youre a cardiothoracic surgeon or something like that, and 50% of your patients die, youre considered a bad cardiothoracic surgeon. But with no disrespect to psychiatrists, there are some excellent psychiatrists out there. There are also a lot of terrible psychiatrists out there, because unless all of their patients commit suicide or half commit suicide, they can treat for a long time without it becoming visible that they're not so good at their craft. Now, he's superb at his craft, and I think he would say that, yes, exploring some shadows, but also just understanding the self really understanding who am I and what's important, what are my ambitions? What are my strivings? Again, I'm lifting from some of the things that he'll describe exactly how to do this. People do not spend enough time addressing those questions, and as a consequence, they discover what resides in their subconscious through the sometimes bad, hopefully also good, but manifestations of their actions. We are driven by this huge 90% of our real estate that is not visible to our conscious awareness. And we need to understand that. You know, I've talked about this before. I've done therapy twice a week since I was a kid. I had to as a condition of being let back in school. I found a way to either through insurance or even when I didn't have insurance. I took an extra job writing for Thrasher magazine when I was a postdoc so I could pay for therapy at a discount because I didn't make much money as a postdoc. I mean, I think for me it's as important as going to the gym and people think it's just ruminating on problems or getting somewhere. No, no, no. If you work with somebody really good, they're forcing you to ask questions about who you really are, what you really want. It's not just about support, but there should be support, there should be rapport. But then it's also, there should be insight. Most people who get therapy, they're getting support, there's rapport. But insight is not easy to arrive at. And a really good psychologist or psychiatrist can help you arrive at deep insights that transform your entire life.
Speaker B: Well, sometimes when I look inside and I do this often, you know, exploring who you truly are, you come to this question, do I accept once you see parts, do I accept this or do I fix this? Is this who you are? Fundamentally, and it will always be this way, or is this a problem to be fixed? Like, for example, one of the things, especially recently, but in general over time, I've discovered about myself, probably has roots in childhood, probably has roots in a lot of things, is I deeply value loyalty, maybe more than the average person. And so when there's disloyalty, it can be painful to me. And so this is who I am. And so do I have to relax a bit? Do I have to fix this part or is this who you are? And there's a million? That's one little.
Speaker A: I think loyalty is a good thing to cling to, provided that when loyalty is broken, that it doesn't have disrupt too many other areas of your life. But it depends also on who's disrupting that loyalty. If it's a coworker versus a romantic partner versus your exclusive romantic partner, depending on the structure of your romantic partner life. I mean, I have always experienced extreme joy and feelings of safety and trust in my friendships. Again, mostly male friendships, but female friendships, too, which is only to say that they were mostly male friendships. The female friendships have also been very loyal. So getting backstabbed is not something I'm familiar with. And, yeah, I love being crewed up, for sure.
Speaker B: And I'm with you, and you and I very much have the same values on this, but that's one little thing. And then there's many other things. Like, I'm extremely self critical. And you look at my, you know, I look at myself as I'm regularly very self critical. There's a self critical engine in my brain. And I talked to, actually, Paul about this, I think, on the podcast quite a bit, and he's saying, this is a really bad thing. Like, you need to fix this. You need to be able to be regularly very positive about yourself. And I kept disagreeing with him, no, this is, like, who I am, like you. And it seems to work. Don't mess with a thing that seems to be working. It's fine. Like, I oscillate between being really grateful and really self critical, but then you have to, like, figure out, what is it? Maybe there's a deeper root thing. There's an. Maybe there's an insecurity in there somewhere that has to do with childhood, and then you're trying to prove something to somebody from your childhood, this kind of thing.
Speaker A: Well, a couple things that I think are hopefully valuable for people here. One is, one way to destroy your life is to spend time trying to control your or somebody else's past. So much of our destructive behavior and thinking comes from wanting something that we saw or did or heard to not be true, rather than really working with that and getting close to what it really was. And sometimes those things are even traumatic, and we need to really get close to them and for them to move through us and that, you know, there are a bunch of different ways to do that with support from others and hopefully, but sometimes on our own as well, I don't think we can rewire our deep preferences and what we find despicable or joyful. I do think that it's really a question of what allows us peace. Like, can you be at peace with the fact that you're very self critical and enjoy that, get some distance from it? Have a sense of humor about it? Or is it driving you in a way that's keeping you awake at night and forcing you back to the table to do work in a way that feels self flagellating and doesn't feel good? Can you get that humility and awareness of one's flaws? And I think that can create this word space sounds very new agey, like get space from it. You can have a sense of humor about how neurotic we can all be. Neurotic isn't actually a bad term in the classic sense of the psychologists and psychiatrists. The Freudians said that the best case is to be neurotic, to actually see one's own issues and work with them, whereas psychotic is the other way to be, which is obviously not good. So I think the question whether or not to work on something or to just accept it as part of ourselves, I think really depends if we feel like it's holding us back or not. I think you're asking perhaps the most profound question about being a human, which is, what do you do with your body? What do you do with your mind? It's also a question. We started off talking about fitness a little bit, which is for whatever reason, do I need to run an ultra marathon? I don't feel like I need to. David Goggins does, and does a whole lot more than that for him. That's important for me, it's not important to do that. I don't think he does it just so he can run the ultras. Theres clearly something else in there for him. And guys like Cam Haines and tremendous respect for what they do and how they do it. Does one need to make their body more muscular, stronger, more endurance, more flexibility? Do you need to read harder books? Do you need to? I think doing hard things feels good. I know it feels good. I know that the worst way to feel is when I'm procrastinating and I don't do something. And then whenever I do something and I complete it and I break through that point where it was hard and then I'm doing it at the end, I actually feel like I was infused with some sort of super chemical and who knows if it's probably a cocktail of endogenously made chemicals. But I think it is good to do hard things. But you have to be careful not to destroy your body, your mind in the process. And I think it's about whether or not you can achieve peace. Can you sleep well at night? Stress isn't bad if you can sleep well at night. You can be stressed all day, go, go, go, go. And it'll optimize your focus. But can you fall asleep and stay deeply asleep at night? Um, being in a hard relationship, some people say, you know, that's not good. Other people like it. Can you be at peace in that? And I think we all have different rpm. We all kind of idle at different rpm. And some people are big, mellow costellos, and others are kind of like, need more friction in order to feel at peace. But I think ultimately what we want is to feel at peace.
Speaker B: Yeah. I've been through some really low points over the past couple of years, and I think the reason could be boiled down to the fact that I haven't been able to find a place of peace, a place or people or moments that give deep inner peace. Yeah. And I think you put it really beautifully. It's. You have to figure out, given who you are, the various characteristics of your mind, all the things, all the contents of the cupboards, how to get space from it. And ultimately, one good representation of that is to be able to laugh at all of it, whatever's going on inside your mind, to be able to step back and just kind of chuckle at the beauty and the absurdity of the whole thing.
Speaker A: Yeah, and keep going. There's this beautiful. As I mentioned, it seems like every podcast lately, I'm a huge rancid fan, mostly because I just think Tim Armstrong's writing is pure poetry, and whether or not you like the music or nothing, and he's written music for a lot of other people, too. He's not, doesn't advertise that much because he's humble, but.
Speaker B: And by the way, I went to a show of theirs like 20 years ago.
Speaker A: Oh, yeah, I'm going to see them in Boston on September 18. I'm literally flying there for. Or I'll take the train up from New York. I'm going to meet a friend of mine named Jim Thiebo, who's a guy who owns a lot of companies in the skateboard industry. We're meeting there like a couple of little kids to go see them play. Amazing, amazing people, amazing music. Very intense, very intense, but embodies all the different emotions. That's why I love it. Right. They have some love songs, they have some hate songs, they have some. And. But, you know, there's a. Going back to what you said, I think there's a song, the first song on the indestructible album, I think there's a. It's sort of. He's just talking about, like, shock and disbelief of discovering things about people that were close to you. And, you know, it's, I won't have. I won't sing it, but, you know, nor I wouldn't dare, but there's this one lyric that's really stuck in my mind ever since that album came out in 2003, which is that nothing's what it seems. So I just sit here laughing. I'm gonna keep going on. I can't get distracted. There is this piece of, like, you gotta learn how to push out the disturbing stuff sometimes and go forward. And, I mean, I remember hearing that lyric and then writing it down. And that was a time where my undergraduate advisor, who was like a mentor and a father to me, blew his head off in the bathtub, like, three weeks before. And then my graduate advisor, who I was working for at that time, who I loved and adored, was really like a mother to me. I knew her when she was pregnant with her two kids, died at 50, breast cancer. And then my postdoc advisor, first day of work at Stanford as a faculty member, sitting across the table like this from him, had a heart attack right in front of me, died of pancreatic cancer at the end of 2017. And I remember just thinking, like, going back to that song lyric over and over and where people would. I haven't had many betrayals in life. I've had a few. But just thinking or seeing something or learning something about something, you can't believe it. And I mentioned that that lyric off that first song, indestructible on that album, because it's this. The raw emotion of, like, I can't believe this. What I just saw is so disturbing, but I have to just keep going forward. There are certain things that we really do need to push not just into our periphery, but often to the gutter and keep going. And that's a hard thing to learn how to do, but if youre going to be functional in life, you have to. And actually, just to get at this issue of do I change or do I embrace this aspect of self. About six months, it was April of this last year, I did some intense work around some things that were really challenging to me, and I did it alone, and it may have involved some medicine. And I expected to get peace through this. I was like, I'm going to let go of the. And I spent 11 hours just getting more and more frustrated and angry about this thing that I was trying to resolve. And I was so unbelievably disappointed that I couldn't get that relief. And I was like, what is this? Like, this is not how this is supposed to work. I'm supposed to be. Feel peace. The clouds are supposed to lift. And so a week went by, and then another half week went bye. And then someone whose opinion I trust very much, I explained this to them because I was getting a little concerned, like, what's going on? This is worse, not better. And they said, this is very simple. You have a giant blind spot, which is your sense of justice. Andrew and your sense of anger are linked like an iron rod, and you need to relax it. And as they said that, I felt the anger dissipate. And so there was something that, I think it is true. I have a very strong sense of justice, and my sense of anger then, at least, was very strongly linked to it. So it's great to have a sense of justice. I hate to see people wronged. I absolutely do. And I'm human. I'm sure I've wronged people in my life. I know I have. They've told me. I've tried to apologize and reconcile, where possible, still have a lot of work to do. But where I see injustice, it draws in my sense of anger in a way that I think is just eating me up. But it was only in hearing that link that I wasn't aware of before. It was in my subconscious, obviously, did I feel the relaxation. There's no amount of plant medicine or MDMA or any kind of chemical you can take that's naturally just going to dissipate. What's hard for oneself if one embraces that, or if one chooses to do it through just talk therapy or journalism journaling or friends or introspection or all of the above, there needs to be an awareness of the things that we're just not aware of. So I think the answer to your question, do you embrace or do you fight these aspects of self, is, I think you get in your subconscious, through good work with somebody skilled or. And sometimes that involves the tools I just mentioned in various combinations, and you figure it out. You figure out if it's serving you. Obviously, it was not bringing me peace. It was undermining my sense of justice. Was undermining my sense of peace. And so in understanding this link now, I would say that in understanding this link between justice and anger, now, I think it's a little bit more of like, you know, it's not like a twizzler stick bendy, but at least it's not like an iron rod. Like, you know, when I see somebody wronged, I mean, it used to just.
Speaker B: Like, immediately, but you're able to step back now. That's, like, to me, the ultimate place to reach is laughter.
Speaker A: I just sit here laughing. Exactly. That's. That's the lyric I like. I can't believe it. So I just sit here laughing. Like, can't get distracted just at some point. But the. But the problem, I think, in just laughing at something like that gives you distance. But the question is, does, do you stop engaging with it at that point? Like, I experienced this. I mean, recently, I got to see how sometimes I'll see something that's just like, what? Like, this is crazy. So I just laugh, but then I continue to engage in it, and it's taking me off course. And so there is a place where, you know, I mean, I realize this is probably a kid's show, too, so I want to keep it g rated. But at some point, for certain things, it makes sense to go, fuck that.
Speaker B: But also laugh at yourself for saying, fuck that.
Speaker A: Yeah. And then move on. So the question is, do you get stuck or do you move on?
Speaker B: Sure. Sure. But, like, there's a lightness of being that comes with laughter. I mean, I've gotten.
Speaker A: Sure.
Speaker B: Like, as you know, I spent the day with Elon today. He just gave me this burnt hair. Do you know what this is?
Speaker A: I have no idea.
Speaker B: I'm sure there's actually. It should be a humor in the lab episode on this. It's a cologne that's burnt hair, and it's, like, supposedly a really intense smell. And it is. Please, it's not gonna leave your nose.
Speaker A: That's okay. Well, that's okay. I'll take a gent. I'll whiffen it as if I were.
Speaker B: You can spray it on yourself, because I don't know if you can.
Speaker A: So, I'm reading an amazing book called an immense World by Ed Yong. He won a Pulitzer for we contain multitudes or something like that, I think is the title of the other book, and the first chapter is all about olfaction and the incredible power that olfaction has. That smells terrible. I don't even know.
Speaker B: And it doesn't leave you, for those listening, it doesn't quite smell terrible, is just intense, and it stays with you. This, to me, represents just laughing at the absurdity of it all.
Speaker A: So I have to ask. So, you were rolling jiu jitsu?
Speaker B: Yeah, we're training jiu jitsu. Yeah.
Speaker A: So, is that fight between Elon and Azok actually gonna happen?
Speaker B: I think Elon is a huge believer of this idea of the most entertaining outcome is the most likely. And he almost, like, there is almost the sense that there's not a free will and the universe has a kind of deterministic gravitational field pulling towards the most fun. And he's just a player in that game. So from that perspective, I think it seems like something like that is inevitable.
Speaker A: Like a little scrap in the parking lot of Facebook or something like that.
Speaker B: Exactly.
Speaker A: Sorry, meta, but it looks like they're training for Elon Zuck has competed right in jiu jitsu.
Speaker B: So I think he is approaching it as a sport. Elon is approaching it as a spectacle. And I mean, the way he talks about it, he's a huge fan of history. He talks about all the warriors that has fought throughout history. If you look, he wants to really do it at the Coliseum, and the Coliseum is for 400 years. There's so many, so much great writing about this. I think over 400,000 people have died in the Colosseum. Gladiators. So this is this historic place that sheds so much blood, so much fear, so much anticipation of battle, all of this. So he loves this kind of spectacle. And also the meme of it, the hilarious absurdity of it. The two tech CEO's battling it out on sand in a place where gladiators fought to the death and then bears and lions ate prisoners as part of the execution process.
Speaker A: Well, it's also gonna be an instance where Mark Zuckerberg and Elon Musk exchanged bodily fluids. They bleed. This is one of the things about fighting, you know, I think it was in that book, it's great book fighter's heart, where he talks about, you know, sort of the intimacy of sparring. I only rolled jiu jitsu with you once, but there was a period of time where I boxed and which I dont recommend. I got hit. I hit some guys and definitely got hit back. I spar on Wednesday nights when I lived on San Diego. And when you spar with somebody, even if they hurt you, especially if they hurt you, you see that person afterwards. And theres an intimacy. It was in that bookfires heart where he explains, youre exchanging bodily fluids with a stranger, and you're in your primitive mind. And so there's an intimacy there that persists.
Speaker B: So you go together through a process of fear, anxiety, like, yeah, when they.
Speaker A: Get you, you nod. I mean, you watch somebody like catch somebody, not so much in professional fighting, but if people are sparring that they catch you, you acknowledge that they caught you. Like, you got me there.
Speaker B: And on the flip side of that. So we trained, and then after that, we played Diablo four.
Speaker A: I don't know what that is. I don't play video games. Sorry.
Speaker B: But it's a video game, so it's like. It's a, you know, pretty intense combat in the video. You're fighting like demons.
Speaker A: Okay. Last video game I played was Mike Tyson's punch out.
Speaker B: There you go. That's pretty.
Speaker A: I met him recently, went on his podcast.
Speaker B: You went? You went?
Speaker A: Wait, it hasn't come out yet.
Speaker B: Oh, hasn't come? Yeah. Okay.
Speaker A: Yeah. I asked Mike. Kids are great. They came in there. They're super smart kids. Goodness gracious. They ask great questions. I asked Mike what he did with the piece of Evander's ear that he bit off.
Speaker B: Did you remember?
Speaker A: He's like, get back to him.
Speaker B: Here you go. Sorry about that.
Speaker A: He sells edibles that are in the shape of ears with a little bite out of it. Yeah. His life has been incredible. His family, you get the sense that they're really a great family.
Speaker B: They're really Mike Tyson. That's a heck of a journey right there, of a man.
Speaker A: Yeah. My now friend Tim Armstrong, like I said, lead singer from Rancy, he put it best. He said that Mike Tyson's life is shakespearean. Down, up, down, up. Just the arcs of his life are just sort of an only in America kind of tale, too. Right?
Speaker B: So, speaking of Shakespeare, I've recently gotten to know Neri Oxman, who's this incredible scientist that works at the intersection of nature and engineering, and she reminded me of this Anna Ahmatova line. This is this great soviet poet that I really love from over a century ago, that each of our lives is a shakespearean drama race to the thousand degree. So I have to ask, why do you think humans are attracted to this kind of shakespearean drama? Is there some aspect we've been talking about, the subconscious mind, that pulls us towards the drama, even though the place of mental health is peace?
Speaker A: Yes and yes.
Speaker B: Do you have some of that?
Speaker A: A draw towards drama?
Speaker B: Yeah, if you look at the empirical data, yes.
Speaker A: I mean, right? If I look at the empirical data, I mean, I think about who I chose to work for as an undergraduate, right? I was at, you know, barely finished high school, finally get to college. Barely. I think I. This is really embarrassing and not something to aspire to. You know, I was thrown out of the dorms for fighting. Barely passed my classes. You know, the girlfriend and I split up. I mean, I was living in a squad, got into a big fight. I was getting in trouble with the law eventually got my act together. Go back to school, start working for somebody. Who do I choose to work for? A guy who's an ex navy guy who smokes cigarettes in the fume hood, drinks coffee, and we're injecting rats with MDMA. And I was drawn to the personality, his energy, but he was a great scientist, worked out a lot on thermal regulation in the brain and more. Go to graduate school. I'm working for somebody and decide that, yeah, working in her laboratory wasn't quite right for me. So I'm literally sneaking into the laboratory next door and working for the woman next door because I like the relationships that she had to a certain set of questions, and she was a kind of a quirky person. So drawn to drama, but drawn to. I like characters. I like people that have texture, and I'm not drawn to raw ambition. I'm drawn to people that seem to have a real passion for what they do and a uniqueness to them that I. You know, you can kind of. Not kind of. I'll just say how it is. I can feel their heart for what they do, and I'm drawn to that, like, and that can be good. The same reason I went to work for Ben Barris as a postdoc, it wasn't because he was the first transgender member of the National Academy of Sciences. That was just a feature of who he was. I loved how he loved Glia. He would talk about these cells like they were the most enchanting things that he'd ever seen in his life. And I was like, this is, like, the biggest nerd I've ever met, and I love him. I think I'm drawn to that. This is another thing that Conti makes elaborates on quite a bit more in the series on mental health coming out. But there are different drives within us. There are aggressive drives, not always for fighting, but for intense interaction. Look at Twitter. Look at. People clearly have an aggressive drive. There's also a pleasure drive. Some people also have a strong pleasure drive. They want to experience pleasure through food, through sex, through friendship, through adventure. But I think the shakespearean drama is the drama of the different drives in different ratios in different people. I know somebody, and she's incredibly kind, has an extremely high pleasure drive. Loves taking great care of herself and people around her through food and through retreats and through all these things and makes spaces beautiful everywhere she goes and gifts these things that are just so unbelievably feminine and incredible, these gifts to people and the kind and thoughtful about what they like, but I would say very little aggressive drive from my read. And then I know other people who just have a ton of aggressive drive and very little pleasure drive. And I think. So there's this alchemy that exists where people have these things in different ratios, and then you blend in the differences in the chromosomes and differences in hormones and differences in personal history, and what you end up with is a species that creates incredible recipes of drama, but also peace, also relief from drama, contentment. I mean, I realize this isn't the exact topic of the question, but someone I know very dearly, actually, an ex girlfriend of mine, long term partner, mine, sent me something recently. I think it hit the nail on the head, which is that ideally for a man, they eventually settle where they find and feel peace, where they feel peaceful, where they can be themselves and feel peaceful. Now, I'm sure there's an equivalent or mirror image of that for women, but this particular post that she sent was about men, and I totally agree. It isn't always that we're seeking friction, but for periods of our life, we seek friction. Drama, adventure, excitement, fights, and doing hard, hard things. And then I think at some point, I'm certainly coming to this point now where it's like, yeah, that's all great, and checked a lot of boxes, but had a lot of close calls, flew really close to the sun on a lot of things with life and limb, heart and spirit. And some of people close to us didn't make it. And sometimes not making it means the career they wanted went off a cliff, or their health went off a cliff, or their life went off a cliff. But I think that there's also the shakespearean drama of the characters that exit the play and are living their lives happily in the backdrop. It just doesn't make for as much entertainment.
Speaker B: That's one other thing that's a benefit, you could say, is the benefit of getting older is finding the shakespearean drama less appealing or finding the joy in the piece.
Speaker A: Yeah, definitely. I mean, I think there's real peace with age. I think the other thing is this notion of checking boxes is a real thing. For me, anyway. I have a morning meditation that I do well. I wake up now, I get my sunlight, I hydrate, I use the bathroom, I do all the things that I talk about. I've started a practice of prayer in the last year, which is new ish for me, which is we could talk.
Speaker B: About in the morning. Can you talk about it a little bit?
Speaker A: Sure. Yeah. And then I have a meditation that I do that actually is where I think through with the different roles that I play. So I start very basic. I say, okay, I'm an animal. We are biologically animals. Human. I'm a man, I'm a scientist, I'm a teacher, I'm a friend, I'm a brother, I'm a son. I go through this. I have this list, and I think about the different roles that I have and the roles that I still want in my life going forward that I haven't yet fulfilled. It's an inventory of where I've been, where I'm Athena, and where I'm going, as they say. And I don't know why I do it, but I started doing it this last year, I think because it helps me understand just how many different contexts I have to exist in and remind myself that there's still more that I haven't done, that I'm excited about.
Speaker B: So within each of those contexts, there's things that you want to kind of accomplish to define that.
Speaker A: Yeah. And I'm ambitious, so I think I'm a brother. I have an older sister, and I love her tremendously. And I think I want to be the best brother I can be to her. Which means maybe a call, maybe just. We do an annual trip together for our birthdays. Our birthdays are close together. We always go to New York for our birthdays. And we've gone for the last three, four years really reminding myself of that role. Not because I'll forget, but because I have all these other roles I'll get pulled into. I say the first one, I'm an animal, because I have to remember that I have a body that needs care like any of us. I need sleep, I need food, I need hydration. That I'm human. The brain of a human is marvelously complex, but also marvelously self defeating. At times. I'm thinking about these things in the context of the different roles, and the whole thing takes about four or five minutes, and I just find it brings me a certain amount of clarity that then allows me to ratchet into the day. The prayer piece, I think I've been reluctant to talk about until now because I don't believe in pushing religion on people, and I think that, and I'm not. It's a highly individual thing, and I do believe that one can be an atheist and still pray, or agnostic and still pray. But for me, it really came about through understanding that there are certain aspects of myself that I just couldn't resolve on my own. And no matter how much therapy, no matter how much, and I haven't done a lot of it, but no matter how much plant medicine or other sources of medicine or exercise or podcasting or science or friendship or any of that, I was just not going to resolve. And so I started this because someone close to me said, a male friend said, prayer is powerful. And I said, well, how? And I don't know how, but if you can allow you to get outside yourself, let you give up control and at the same time take control. I don't even like saying take control, but the whole notion is that. And again, forgive me, but there's no other way to say it. The whole notion is that, you know, like, God works through us, whatever God is to you, he, him, her, whatever life force, nature, whatever it is to you, right. That it works through us. And so I do a prayer. I'll just describe it where I ask. I make an ask to help remove my defects, my character defects. I pray to God to help remove my character defects so that I can show up better in all the roles of my life and do good work, which for me is learning and teaching, learning and teaching. And so you might say, well, how is that different than a meditation? Well, I'm acknowledging that there is something that bigger than me, bigger than nature as I understand it, that I cannot understand or control, nor do I want to, and I'm just giving over to that. And does that make me less of a scientist? I sure as hell hope not. I certainly know there's the head of our neurosciences at Stanford until recently. You should talk to him directly about it. Bill Newsom has talked about his religious life. For me, it's really a way of getting outside myself and then understanding how I fit into this bigger picture. And the character defects part is real, right? I'm a human. I have defects. I got a lot of flaws in me, like anybody, but. And trying to acknowledge them and asking for help in removing them, not magically, but through right action, through my right action. So I do that every morning. And I have to say that it's helped. It's helped a lot. It's helped me be better to myself, be better to other people. I still make mistakes, but it's becoming a bigger, bigger part of my life. And I never thought I'd talk like this, but I think it's clear to me that if we don't believe in something, again, doesn't have to be traditional, standardized religion. But if we don't believe in something bigger than ourselves, we at some level will self destruct. I really? I really think so. It's power, and it's powerful in a way that all the other stuff, meditation and all the tools, is not because it's really operating at a much deeper and bigger level. And, you know. Yeah, I think that's all I can talk about it mostly because I'm still working out. You know, the scientists in me wants to understand how it works, and I want to understand. And the point is to just go, you know, there's something. There's, you know, for lack of a better language for it. There's higher power than me and what I can control. I'm giving up control on certain things. And somehow that restores a sense of agency for right action, better action.
Speaker B: I think perhaps a part of that is just the humility that comes with acknowledging there's something bigger and more powerful than you.
Speaker A: And then you can't control everything. It's. I mean, you go through life as a hard driving person, you know, forward, center of mass. I remember being that way since I was little. It's like a new Legos. I'm like, I'm gonna make all the Legos. I was like, on the weekends, you know, learning about medieval weapons and then giving lectures about it in class when I was five or six years old. We're learning about tropical fish and, you know, cataloging all of them at the store and then organizing it and making my, you know, my dad drive me or my mom drive me to some fish store and then spending all my time there until they throw me out. You know, all of that. But I also remember my entire life, I would secretly pray when things were good and things weren't good, but mostly when things weren't good, because it's important to pray for me. It's important to pray each morning regardless. But when things weren't right, I couldn't make sense of them. I would secretly pray, but I felt kind of ashamed of that for whatever reason. And then it was once in college, I distinctly remember I was having a hard time with a number of things. And I took a run down to Sands beach. It was UC Santa Barbara. And I remember, I just. I was like, I don't know if I even have the right to do this, but I'm just praying. And I just prayed for the ability to be as brutally honest with myself and with other people as I possibly could be about a particular situation I was in at that time. I mean, I think now it's probably safe to say I'd gone off to college because of a high school girlfriend. We had essentially, she was my family, frankly, more than my biological family was at a certain stage of life, and we'd reached a point where we were diverging. And it was incredibly painful. It was like losing everything I had. And it was like, what do I do? How do I manage this? Do I, you know, I was ready to quit and join the fire service just to support us so that we could move forward. And it was just. But praying, just saying, I can't figure this out on my own. It's sort of like, I can't figure this out on my own, and how frustrating that is. No number of friends could tell me and inner wisdom couldn't tell me. And eventually it led me to the right answers. And she and I are friendly friends to this day. She's happily married with a child, and we're on good terms. But I think it's, it's a scary thing, but it's the best thing when you. I can't control all this. And asking for help, I think, is also the piece. You're not asking for some magic hand to come down and take care of it, you're asking for the help to come through you right, so that your body is used to do these right works, right action.
Speaker B: Isn't it interesting that this secret thing that you're almost embarrassed by, that you did it as a child, is something you. It's another thing you do as you get older is you realize those things are part of you, and it's actually a beautiful thing.
Speaker A: A lot of the content of the podcast is deep academic content. And we talk about everything from eating disorders to bipolar disorder to depression. A lot of different topics, but the tools, the protocols, as we say, the sunlight viewing, all the rest, a lot of that stuff is just stuff I wish I had known when I was in graduate school. If I had known to go outside every once in a while and get some sunlight, not just stay in the lab, I would have. You know, I might not have hit like a really tough round of depression when I was a postdoc and working twice as hard. And when my body would break down or I'd get sick a lot. I don't get sick much anymore. Occasionally about once every 18 months to two years, I get to ill get something. But I used to break my foot skateboarding all the time. I couldnt understand whats wrong with my body. Im getting injured. I cant do what everyone else can now. I developed more slowly at a long arc of puberty, but I. So that was part of it. I was still developing, but how to get your body stronger, how to build endurance. No one told me the information wasn't there. So a lot of what I put out there is the information that I wish I had had, because once I had it I was like, wow, a, this stuff really works. B, it's grounded in something real. Sometimes certain protocols are a combination of animal, human and animal and human studies, sometimes clinical trials, sometimes there's some mechanistic conjecture for some, not all. I always make clear which. But in the end, figuring out how things work so that we can be happier, healthier, more productive, suffer less, like reduce the suffering of the world. And I think that, well, I'll just say thank you for asking about the prayer piece again. I'm nothing pushing or even encouraging it on anyone. I've just found it to be tremendously useful for me.
Speaker B: You know, I mean, about prayer in general, you said information and figuring out how to get stronger, healthier, smarter, all those kinds of things. A part of me believes that deeply, you know, you can gain a lot of knowledge and wisdom through learning. But a part of me believes that all the wisdom I need was there when I was eleven and twelve years old.
Speaker A: And then it got cluttered over. Well, listen, I can't wait for you and Conti to talk again, because when he gets going about the subconscious and the amount of this that sits below the surface like an iceberg, and the fact that when we're kids, we're not obscuring a lot of that subconscious as as much, and sometimes that can look a little more primitive. I mean, a kid thats disappointed will let you know. A kid thats excited will let you know. And you feel that raw exuberance or that raw dismay. And I think that as we grow older, we learn to cover that stuff up. We wear masks and we have to, to be functional. Right? I dont think we all want to go around just being completely raw, but as you said, as you get older, you get to this point where you kind of go, eh, what are we really trying to protect anyway? I mean, I have this theory that certainly my experience has taught me that a lot of people, but I'll talk about men because that's what I know best, whether or not they show up strong or not, that they're really afraid of being weak. Like they're just afraid. Sometimes the strength is even a way to try and not be weak. Right. Which is different than being strong for its own sake. I'm not just talking about physical strength, I'm talking about intellectual strength. I'm talking about money. I'm talking about expressing drive. I've been watching this series, a little bit of chimp empire.
Speaker B: Oh, yeah.
Speaker A: So chimp empire is amazing, right? They have the head of. He's not the head chimp, but the alpha in the group. And he's getting older. And so what does he do? Every once in a while, he goes on these vigor displays. He goes and he grabs branch, he starts breaking, and he starts thrashing them. And he's incredibly strong, and they're all kind of, like, watching. I mean, yeah, I immediately think of people like, they're deadlifting on Instagram, and I just think displays of vigor. This is just the primate sewing that displays the vigor. Now, what's interesting is that he's doing that specifically to say, hey, I still have what it takes to lead this troop. Okay? Then there are the ones that are subordinate to him, but not so far behind.
Speaker B: It seems to be that there's a very clear numerical ranking.
Speaker A: There is.
Speaker B: It's clear who's the number two, number.
Speaker A: Three, who gets to mate first, who gets to eat first. This exists in other animal societies, too. But Bob Sapolsky would be a great person to talk about this with because he knows, obviously, tremendous amount about it, and I know just the top contour, but, yeah. So number two, three, and four males are aware that he's doing these vigor displays, but they're also aware, because in primate evolution, they got some extra forebrain, too. Not as much as us, but they got some. And they're aware that the vigor displays are displays that, because they've done them as well in a different context, might not just be displays of vigor, but might also be an insurance policy against people seeing weakness. Okay? So now they start using that prefrontal cortex to do some interesting things. So in primate world, if a male is friendly with another male, wants to affiliate with him and say, hey, I'm backing you, they'll go over and they'll pick off the little parasites and eat them. The grooming is extremely important. In fact, if they want to ostracize or kill one of the members of their troop, they will just leave it alone. No one will groom it. And then there's actually a really disturbing sequence in that show of then the parasites start to eat away on their skin. They get infections. They have issues. No one will mate with them. They have other issues as well and can potentially die. So the interesting thing is, is number two and three start to line up a strategy to groom this guy. But they are actually thinking about overtaking the entire troop, setting in a new alpha. But the current alpha did that to get where he is. So he knows that they're doing this grooming thing, but they might not be sincere about the grooming. So what does he do? He takes the whole troop on a raid to another troop and sees who will fight for him and who won't. This is advanced contracting of behavior for species that normally we don't think of as sophisticated as us. So it's very interesting, and it gets to something that I hope we'll have an opportunity to talk about, because it's something that I'm obsessed with lately, is this notion of overt versus covert contracts. There are overt contracts where you exchange work for money or you exchange any number of things in an overt way, but then there are covert contracts, and those take on a very different form and always lead to, in my belief, bad things.
Speaker B: Well, how much of human and chimp relationships are over versus covert?
Speaker A: Of, well, here's one thing that we know is true. Dogs and humans, the dog to human relationship is 100% overt. They don't manipulate you. Now, you could say they do in the sense that they learn that if they look a certain way or roll on their back, they get food. But there's no banking of that behavior for a future date where then they are going to undermine you and take your position. Okay, so in that sense, dogs can be a little bit manipulative in some sense, but, um, now, okay, so overt contract would be, we both want to do some work together. We're going to make some money. You get x percentage. I get x percentage. Overt covert contract, which is, in my opinion, always bad, would be, we're going to do some work together. You're going to get a percentage of money. I'm going to get a percentage of money could look just like the overt contract, but secretly, I'm resentful that I got the percentage I got. So what I start doing is covertly taking something else. What do I take? Maybe I take the opportunity to jab you verbally every once in a while. Maybe I take the opportunity to show up late. Maybe I take the opportunity to get to know one of your coworkers so that I might start a business with them. That's covert contract. And you see this sometimes in romantic relationships, one person, we won't set the male or female in any direction here and just say it's, I'll make you feel powerful if you make me feel desired. Okay, great. There's nothing explicitly wrong about that contract if they both know and they both agree. But what if it's, I'll do that, but I'll have kids with you, so you feel powerful. You'll have kids with me. So I feel desired, but secretly, I don't want to do that. Or one person says, I dont want to do that, or both dont. So what they end up doing is saying, okay, so I expect something else. I expect you to do certain things for me, or I expect you to pay for certain things for me. Covert contracts are the signature of everything bad. Overt contracts are the signature of all things good. And I think about this a lot, because ive seen a lot of examples of this. Ive, like anyone, we participate in these things whether or not we want to or not. And the thing that gets transacted the most is, well, I should say, the things that get transacted the most are the overt things. You'll see money, time, sex, property, whatever. It happens to be information. But what ends up happening is that when people, I believe, don't feel safe, they feel threatened in some way. Like it's. They don't feel safe in a certain interaction. What they do is they start taking something else while still engaging in the exchange. And I'll tell you, if there's one thing about human nature that's bad, it's that feature. Why that feature? Or is it a bugger feature, as you engineers like to say? I think it's because we were allocated a certain extra amount of prefrontal cortex that makes us more sophisticated than a dog, more sophisticated than a chimpanzee. But they do it, too. And it's because it's often harder to deal with in the short term. To deal with the real sense of, this is scary. This feels threatening than it is to play out all the iterations. It takes a lot of brain work. You're playing chess and go simultaneously trying to figure out where things are going to end up, and we just don't know. So it's a way, I think, of creating a false sense of certainty. But I'll tell you, covert contracts, the only certainty is that it's going to end badly. The question is how badly. Conversely, overt contracts always end well. Always. The problem with overt contracts is that you can't be certain that the other person is not engaging in a covert contract. You can only take responsibility for your own contract.
Speaker B: Well, one of the challenges of being human is looking at another human being and figuring out their way of being their behavior, which of the two types of contracts it represents, because they look awfully the same on the surface. And one of the challenges of being human is the decision we all make is, are you somebody that takes a leap of trust and trust other humans that are willing to take the hurt? Are you going to be cynical and skeptical and avoid most interactions until they, over a long period of time, prove your trust?
Speaker A: Yeah, I never liked the phrase history repeats itself when it comes to humans because it doesn't apply if the people or the person is actively working to resolve their own flaws. I do think that if people are willing to do dedicated introspective work, go into their subconscious, do the hard work, have hard conversations, and get better at hard conversations, something that I'm constantly trying to get better at. I think people can change, but they have to want to change.
Speaker B: It does seem like deep down we all can kind of tell the difference between overt and covert. Like we have a good sense. I think one of the benefits of having this characteristic of mine where I value loyalty, I've been extremely fortunate to spend most of my life in overt relationships, and I think that creates a really fulfilling life.
Speaker A: But there's also this thing that maybe we're in this portion of the podcast now, but I.
Speaker B: But I'm sure this is late at night we're talking.
Speaker A: That's right. Certainly late for me. But I'm 2 hours. I came in today on, I'm still in California.
Speaker B: And we should also say that you came here to wish me a happy birthday.
Speaker A: I did, I did.
Speaker B: And the podcast is just like a fun last minute thing I suggested.
Speaker A: Yeah. Some close friends of yours have arranged a dinner that I'm really looking forward to. I won't say which night, but it's next couple of nights. Your circadian clock is one of the most robust features of your biology. I know you can be nocturnal or you can be diurnal. We know you're mostly nocturnal at certain times of the year. Lucks. But there are very, very few people can get away with no sleep. Very few people can get away with a chaotic sleep wake schedule. So you have to obey a 24 hours, aka circadian rhythm, if you want to remain healthy of mind and body. We also have to acknowledge that it's aging isn't linear. Right?
Speaker B: What do you mean?
Speaker A: Well, I mean the degree of change between years 35 and 40 is not going to be the degree of change between 40 and 45. But I will say this, I'm 48 and I feel better in every aspect of my psychology and biology now than I did when I was in my twenties. Yeah, sort of quality of thought, time spent physically. I can do what I did then, which probably says more about what I could do then than what I can do now. But if you keep training, you can continue to get better. The key is to not get injured. And I've never trained super hard. I've trained hard, but I've been cautious to not, for instance, weight train more than two days in a row. I do a split, which is basically three days a week, and the other day's a run. Take one full day off, take week off every twelve to 16 weeks. I've not been the guy hurling the heaviest weights or running the furthest distance, but I have been the guy who's continuing to do it when a lot of my friends are talking about knee injuries.
Speaker B: Hey.
Speaker A: Talking about, hey, hey. But of course, with sport, you can't account for everything the same way you can with fitness. And I have to acknowledge that unless one is powerlifting, weightlifting and running, you can get hurt. But it's not like skateboarding, where if you, if you're going for it, you're going to get hurt. That's just, you're landing on concrete and, um, it, with jiu jitsu, like, people are trying to hurt you so that you say stop. Um, so with a sport, it's different. Um, and these days, I don't really do a sport any longer. Um, I work out, um, stay fit. I I used to continue to do sports, but I kept getting hurt. And, and frankly, now, like a rolled ankle, I may put out a little small skateboard part in 2024, because people have been saying, we want to see the kick flip. They'll say, well, I'll do a heel flip instead. But, okay, I might put out a little part because some of the guys that work on our podcast are from DC. I think by now I should at least do it just to show, like, I'm not making it up, and I probably will. But I think doing a sport is different. That's how you get hurt, overuse and doing it an actual sport. And so, you know, hat tip to those, do an actual sport.
Speaker B: And that's a difficult decision. Like, I. A lot of people have to make. I have to make with jiu jitsu, for example. Like, if you just look empirically, I've trained really hard from all my life in grappling sports and fighting sports and all this kind of stuff, and I've avoided injury for the most part. And I would say, I would attribute that to, um, training a lot sounds counterintuitive, but training well and safely and correctly, keeping good form, saying no, and I need to say no, but training a lot and taking it seriously. Now, when this training is kind of a side, really a side thing, I find that the injury is, um, becomes a higher and higher probability when you're.
Speaker A: Just doing it every once in a while.
Speaker B: Every once in a while?
Speaker A: Yeah, that. I think you said something really important that the saying no. I mean, the times I have gotten hurt training is when someone's like, hey, let's hop on this workout together, and it becomes a. Let's challenge each other to do something outrageous. Sometimes that can be fun, though. I went up to Cam Haynes gym, and he does these very high repetition weight workouts that are in circuit form. I was sore for two weeks, but I learned a lot and didn't get injured. And, yes, we ate bow hunted elk afterwards.
Speaker B: Nice. But the injury has been a really difficult psychological thing for me. Cause. So I've injured my finger. Pinky finger. I've injured my knee.
Speaker A: Yeah. Your kitchen is filled with splints.
Speaker B: Splints. I'm trying to figure. I'm trying to figure out.
Speaker A: It's like, if you look in Lex's kitchen, there's some really good snacks. I had some right before. He's very good about keeping cold drinks in the fridge, and all the water has element in it, which is great. I love that. But then there's a whole, like, hospital's worth of splints.
Speaker B: Yeah, I'm trying. I'm trying to figure out. So here's the thing. You finger, like, pop out like this, right? Pinky finger. I'm trying to figure out, how do I splint in such a way that I can still program, still play guitar, but protect this kind of torque motion that creates a huge amount of pain.
Speaker A: Unless you have a jujitsu injury.
Speaker B: Jiu jitsu. But it's a. It's not the kind of. It's probably more like a skateboarding style injury, which is. It's unexpected and a silly.
Speaker A: It's the thing that happens in a second. I didn't break my foot doing anything important. I broke my fifth minotaur stepping off a curb. So that's why they're called accidents. If you get hurt doing something awesome, that's a trophy that you have to work through. It's part of your payment to the universe. If you get hurt stepping off a curb or, you know, doing something stupid, it's called a stupid accent.
Speaker B: Since we brought up chimp empire. Let me ask you about relationships. I think we talked about relationships.
Speaker A: Yeah. I only date homo sapiens almost the morning meditation.
Speaker B: The night is still young. You are human. No, but you are also an animal. Don't sell yourself short.
Speaker A: No, I would say, listen, any discussion on the Hebrew Moon lab podcast about sexual health or anything? The critical force, consensual, age appropriate, context appropriate, species appropriate.
Speaker B: Species appropriate. Well, can I just tell you about sexual selection? I've been watching life in color with David Attenborough. I've been watching a lot of nature documentaries, talking about inner peace. It brings me so much peace to watch nature at its worst and at its best. So life in color is a series on Netflix where it presents some of the most colorful animals on earth and kind of tells their story of how they got there through natural selection. So, you know, you have the peacock with the feathers, and it's just such incredible colors. Like, the peacock has these tail feathers, the male, that are gigantic, and they're super colorful. And there are these eyes on it. It's not eyes. It's like, I like areas. And. And they wiggle their ass, like, to show the tails. They wiggle the tails.
Speaker A: Eye spots.
Speaker B: The eye spots, yes. Thank you. You know, this probably way better than me. I'm just quoting it.
Speaker A: No, continue.
Speaker B: But it was. It's just I'm watching this, and then the female is as boring looking as pot. Like, she has no colors or nothing, but she's standing there bored just seeing this entire display. And I'm just wondering, like, the entirety of life on earth or not the entirety, post bacteria is like, in. At least in part, maybe in large part, can be described through this process of natural selection, of sexual selection. So dudes fighting and then women selecting. It seems like just the. The entirety of that series shows some incredible birds and insects and shrimp. They're all beautiful and colorful. Mantis shrimp, mantis shrimp. They're just. They're incredible. And it's all about getting laid. It's fascinating. Like, I just. And there's nothing like watching that and chimp empire to make you realize we humans, that's the same thing. That's all we're doing. And all the beautiful variety, all the bridges and the buildings and the rockets and the Internet, all of that is this kind of, is at least in part, this kind of a product of this kind of showing off for each other and all the wars and all this. Anyway. Well, there's a. Relationships.
Speaker A: Well, right before you ask about relationship, I think what's clear is that every species, it seems animal species wants to make more of itself and protect its young.
Speaker B: Well, to protect this young is non obvious.
Speaker A: So not destroy enough of itself that it can't get more to reproductive competent age. I mean, I think that we have a natural. I mean, healthy people have a natural reflex to protect children.
Speaker B: Well, I don't know.
Speaker A: And those that can't.
Speaker B: Wait a minute, wait a, wait, wait a minute. I've seen enough animals that are murdering the children or some other.
Speaker A: Sure, there's even sibilicide. But first of all, I just want to say that I was delighted in your delight around animal kingdom stuff because this is a favorite theme of mine as well. But there's, for instance, some fascinating data on, for instance, for those that grew up on farms, they'll be familiar with free martins. You know about free martins? This is. They're cows that have multiple calves inside them. And there's a situation in which the calves will secrete, if there's more than one inside, will secrete chemicals that will hormonally castrate the calf next to them so they can't reproduce. So already in the womb they are fighting for future resources. That's how early this stuff can start. So it's chemical warfare in the womb against the siblings. Sometimes there's outright sibilicide. Siblings are born, they kill one another. This also becomes biblical stories, right? There are instances of cuttlefish, beautiful cephalopods, like octopuses and that is the plural as we make.
Speaker B: That's a meme on the Internet.
Speaker A: Oh, yeah, that became a meme or a little discussion years ago.
Speaker B: It spread pretty quick, and now we just resurfaced it.
Speaker A: The dismay in your voice is so amusing. In any event, that male cuttlefish will disguise themselves as female cuttlefish, infiltrate the female cuttlefish group and then mate with them. All sorts of types of covert operations. It's like a drinking game where every time we say covert in a contract in this episode, you have to take a shot of espresso. Please don't do that. You'd be dead by the end.
Speaker B: So actually, just a small tangent. It does make me wonder how much intelligence covert contracts require. It seems like not much if you can do it in the animal kingdom, there's some kind of instinctual. It is based perhaps in like, fear.
Speaker A: Yeah, it could be simple algorithm. If there's some ambiguity about numbers and I'm not with these guys. And then flip to the alternate strategy. I actually have a story about this that I think is relevant I used to have cuttlefish in my lab in San Diego. We went and got them from a guy out in the desert. We put them in the lab. It was amazing. And they had a postdoc who was studying prey capturing cuttlefish. They have a very ballistic, extremely rapid strike and grab of the shrimp. And we were using high speed cameras to characterize all this. Looking at binoculars, they normally have their eyes on the side of their head. When they see something they want to eat, the eyes translocate to the front, which allows them stereopsis, depth perception, allows them to strike. We were doing some unilateral eye removals. They would miss, et cetera. Okay, this has to do with eye spots. This was during a government shutdown period where the ghost shrimp that they normally feed on, that we would ship in from the gulf down here, weren't available to us. So we had to get different shrimp. And what we noticed was the cuttlefish normally would just sneak up on the shrimp. We learned this by data collection. And if the shrimp was facing them, they would do this thing with their tentacles of kind of enchanting the cuddle the shrimp. And if the shrimp wasn't facing them, they wouldn't do it, and they would ballistically grab it and eat them. Well, when we got these new shrimp, the new shrimp had eye spots on their tails. And then the cuttlefish would do this kind of attempt to enchant, regardless of the position of the ghost shrimp. So what does that mean? Okay, well, it means that there's some sort of algorithm in the cuttlefish's mind that says, okay, if you see two spots, move your tentacles, so it can be, as you pointed out, it can be a fairly simple operation, but it looks diabolical, it looks cunning, but all it is is strategy B. Yeah, but.
Speaker B: It'S still somehow emerged. I mean, I don't think that success calling it an algorithm doesn't.
Speaker A: I feel like, well, there's a circuit there that gets implemented in a certain context, but that circuit had to evolve.
Speaker B: You do realize super intelligent AI will look at us humans and will say the exact thing. There's a circuit in there that evolved to do this algorithm A and algorithm B. And it's trivial. And to us humans, it's fancy and beautiful and write poetry about it.
Speaker A: But because we don't understand the subconscious, because they want that AI algorithm cannot see into what it can't see. It doesn't understand the underworkings of what allows all of this conversation stuff to manifest. And we can't even see it. How could AI see it? Maybe it will. Maybe AI will solve and give us access to our subconscious. Maybe your AI friend or coach like I think Andreessen and others are arguing is going to happen at some point is going to say, hey Lex, you're making decisions lately that are not good for you. But it's because of this algorithm that you picked up in childhood that if you don't state your explicit needs up front, you're not going to get what you want. So why do it? From now on you need to actually make a list of every absolutely outrageous thing that you want, no matter how outrageous, and communicate that immediately. And that will work.
Speaker B: We're talking about coefficient sexual selection. And then we went into some where do we go? Well, and you said you were excited.
Speaker A: I was excited. Well, you were just saying what about these covert contracts and animals do them? I think it's simple contextual engagement of a neural circuit, which is not just nerd speak for saying they do a different strategy. It's saying that there has to be a circuit there. Hardwired circuit maybe learned, but probably hardwired that can be engaged, right. You can't build neural machinery out of in a moment. You need to build that circuit over time. What is building it over time? You select for it. The cuttlefish that did not have that alternate context driven circuitous didnt survive when there was a. When all the shrimp that they normally disappear and the I spotted shrimp showed up and there were a couple that had some miswiring. This is why mutation, right, x men stuff is real. They had a mutation that had some alternate wiring and that wiring got selected for it became a mutation that was adaptive as opposed to maladaptive. This is something people dont often understand about genetics, is that it only takes a few generations to devolve a trait. Make it worse. But it takes a long time to evolve an adaptive trait. There are exceptions to that, but most often that's true. So a species needs a lot of generations. We are hopefully still evolving as a species. And it takes a long time but to evolve more adaptive traits. But doesn't take long to devolve adaptive traits so that you're getting sicker or you're not functioning as well. So choose your mate wisely. And that's perhaps a good segue into sexual selection.
Speaker B: I could tell you're good at this. Why did I bring up sexual selection? Relationships. So sexual selection in humans. I don't think you've done an episode on relationships.
Speaker A: No, I did an episode on attachment, but not on relationships. The series with Conti includes one episode of the four. That's all about relational understanding and how to select a mate based on matching.
Speaker B: Of drives and all the demons inside the subconscious. How to match demons, that they dance well together or what?
Speaker A: And how generative two people are.
Speaker B: What does that mean?
Speaker A: Means how the way he explains it is how devoted to creating growth within the context of the family, the relationship with work.
Speaker B: Well, let me ask you about mating rituals and how to find such a relationship. I mean, you're really big on friendships, on the value of friendships.
Speaker A: I am.
Speaker B: And that, I think, extends itself into one of the deepest kinds of friendships you can have, which is a romantic relationship. What mistakes, successes and wisdom can you impart?
Speaker A: Well, I've certainly made some mistakes. I've also made some good choices in this realm. First of all, we have to define what sort of relationship we're talking about. If one is looking for a life partner, potentially somebody to establish family with, with or without kids, with or without pets. Right. Families can take different forms. I mean, I certainly experienced being a family in a prior relationship where it was the two of us and our two dogs, and it was like, it was family, like we had our little family. I think based on my experience and based on input from friends who themselves have very successful relationships, I must say I've got friends who are in long term, monogamous, very happy relationships where there seems to be a lot of love, a lot of laughter, a lot of challenge and a lot of growth. And both people, it seems, really want to be there and enjoy being there.
Speaker B: Just to pause on that. One thing to do, I think, by way of advice, is listen to people who are in long term successful relationships. That's like, it seems dumb, but like, like we both know and are friends with Joe Rogan, who's been in a long term, really great relationship, and he's been an inspiration to me. So you take advice from that guy?
Speaker A: Definitely. And several members of my podcast team are in excellent relationships. I think one of the things that rings true over and over again in the advice and in my experience, is find someone who's really a great friend, like, build a really great friendship with that person. Now, obviously not just a friend if we're talking romantic relationship, but, and of course, sex is super important, but it should be a part of that particular relationship alongside or meshed with the friendship. Can it be a majority of the positive exchange? I suppose it could, but I think the friendship piece is extremely important because what's required in a successful relationship clearly is joy in being together. Trust, a desire to share experience, both mundane and more adventurous, support each other, acceptance, a real, maybe even admiration, but certainly delight in being with the person. Earlier we were talking about peace, and I think that that sense of peace comes from knowing that the person you're in friendship with or that you're in romantic relationship, or ideally both, because let's assume healthy relationship, the best romantic relationship includes a friendship component with that person. It's like you just really delight in their presence, even if it's a quiet presence and you delight in seeing them delight in things. That's clear. The trust piece is huge and that's where people start. We don't want to focus on what works, not what doesn't work. But that's where I think people start engaging these covert contracts. They're afraid of being betrayed, so they betray. They're afraid of giving up too much vulnerability, so they hide their vulnerability. Or in the worst cases, they feign vulnerability again, that's a covert contract that just simply undermines everything. It becomes one plus one equals two minus one to infinity. Conversely, I think if people can have really hard conversations, this is something I've had to work really hard on in recent years that I'm still working hard on. But the friendship piece seems to be the thing that rises to the top. When I talk to friends who are in these great relationships, it's like they have so much respect and love and joy in being with their friend. It's the person that they want to spend as much of their non working, non platonic friendship time with and the person that they want to experience things with and share things with. And it sounds so kind of canned and cliche nowadays, but I think if you step back and examine how most people go about finding a relationship, sort of like, oh, like am I attracted? Of course, physical attraction is important and other forms of attraction too. And they sort of enter through that portal, which makes sense. That's the mating dance, right? That's the peacock situation. That's hopefully not the cuttlefish situation. But I think that there seems to be a history of people close to me getting into great relationships where they were friends for a while first or maybe didn't sleep together right away, that they actually intentionally deferred on, that this has not been my habit or my experience. I've gone the more I think typical, like, oh, theres an attraction like this person, theres an interest. You kind of explore all dimensions of relationship really quickly, except perhaps the moving in part and the having kids part, which ideally because its a bigger step, harder to undo without more severe consequences. But I think the whole take it slow thing I dont think is about getting to know someone slowly. I think its about that physical piece, because that does change the nature of the relationship. And I think it's because it gets right into the more hardwired, primitive circuitry around our feelings of safety, vulnerability. There's something about romantic and sexual interactions where it's almost like assets and liabilities, where people are trying to figure out how much to engage their time and their energy, and multiple people, I'm talking about from both sides, male, female or whatever sides. But where it's like assets and liabilities. And that's where it starts getting into those complicated contracts early on, I think. And so maybe that's why if a really great friendship and admiration is established first, even if people are romantically and sexually attracted to one another, then that piece can be added in a little bit later in a way that really kind of just seals up the whole thing. And then, who knows? Maybe they spend 90% of their time having sex. I don't know. Thats not for me to say or decide, obviously. But theres something there about staying out of a certain amount of risk of having to engage covert contract in order to protect oneself.
Speaker B: But I do think love at first sight, this kind of idea is in part realizing very quickly that you are great friends. Like, I've had that interesting experience of friendship recently. Just. It's not really friendship, but like, oh, you get each other with humans. Not. Not in a romantic setting.
Speaker A: Right. Friendship.
Speaker B: Yeah, just friendship.
Speaker A: But not, dare I say I felt that way about you when we met.
Speaker B: Right.
Speaker A: But we also. This dude's cool and he's smart and he's funny and he's driven and he's giving and he. And he's got an edge. And I want to learn from him, want to hang out with him. That was the beginning of our friendship, was essentially that set of internal realizations.
Speaker B: Keep going, just keep going.
Speaker A: Being a sharp dresser.
Speaker B: Yeah, it just looks great. Shirtless on horseback.
Speaker A: Yes. No, no. Listen. Despite what some people might say on the Internet, it's a purely platonic friendship.
Speaker B: Somebody asked if Andrew Huberman has a girlfriend. And somebody says, I think so. And the third comment was, this really like, breaks my heart, like, that. Alex and Andrew are not an item.
Speaker A: We are not. We are great friends, but we are not an item.
Speaker B: It's true.
Speaker A: It's official. I hear over and over again from friends that have made great choices and awesome partners and have these fantastic relationships for long periods of time that seem to continue to thrive. At least that's what they tell me. And that's what I observe. Establish the friendship first and give it a bit of time before sex. And so, you know, I think that's the feeling. That's the feeling. And these are. We're talking micro features and macro features. We're talking, you know, and this isn't about perfection. It's actually about the imperfections, which is kind of cool. I like quirky people. I like characters. I'll tell you where I've gone badly wrong and where I see other people going badly wrong. There is no rule that says that you have to be attracted to all attractive people by any means. It's very important to develop a sense of taste in romantic attractions. I believe what you really like in terms of a certain style, a certain way of being, and of course, that includes sexuality and sex itself, the verb, but I think it also includes their just general way of being. And when you really adore somebody, you like the way they answer the phone. And when they don't answer the phone, that way, you know something's off and you want to know. And so I think that the more you can tune up your powers of observation, not looking for things that you like, and the more that stuff just kind of washes over you, the more likely you are to, quote, unquote, fall in love. As a mutual friend of ours said to me, listen, when it comes to romantic relationships, if it's not 100% in you, it ain't happening. And I've never seen a violation of that statement where it's like, yeah, it's mostly good, and they're this. And is it like the negotiations already, it's doomed. And that doesn't mean someone has to be perfect. The relationship has to be perfect, but it's got to feel 100% inside, like, yes, yes, and yes. I think Dysaroth, when he was on here, your podcast, mentioned something that I think the words were, or maybe it was in his book, I don't recall, but that love is one of these things that we story into with somebody. We create this idea of ourselves in the future, and we look at our past time together, and then you story into it. I mean, there are very few things like that I can't story into building flying cars. I have to actually go do something. I mean, love is also retroactively constructed. I mean, anyone who's gone through a breakup understands the grief of knowing, oh, like, this is something I really shouldn't be in for whatever reason, because it only takes one. If the other person doesn't want to be in, then you shouldn't be in it. But then missing so many things, and that's just the attachment machinery, really at work.
Speaker B: I have to ask you a question that somebody on our amazing team wanted to ask. He's happily married. Another, like you mentioned, incredible relationship.
Speaker A: Are they good friends?
Speaker B: Are they amazing friends?
Speaker A: There you go.
Speaker B: But I'm not saying who it is, so I can say some stuff, which is, it started out as a great sexual connection.
Speaker A: Oh, well, there you go.
Speaker B: But then became very close friends after that.
Speaker A: Listen.
Speaker B: There you go.
Speaker A: So, speaking of sex to Rome, he.
Speaker B: Has a wonderful son, and he is wanting to have a second kid. And he wanted to ask the great Andrew Huberman, is there like, sexual positions or any kind of thing that can help maximize the chance that they have a girl versus a boy? Because they had a wonderful boy, they want a girl. Is there a way to control the gender?
Speaker A: This has been debated for a long time, and I did a four and a half hour episode on fertility. And the reason I did a four and a half hour episode on fertility is that, first of all, I find that reproductive biology be fascinating. And I wanted a resource for people that were thinking about or struggling with having kids, for whatever reason. And it felt important to me to combine the male and female components in the same episode. It's all timestamps, so you don't have to listen to the whole thing. We talk about ivf and vitro fertilization. We talk about natural pregnancy. Okay. The data on position is very interesting, but let me just say a few things. There are a few clinics now, in particular, some out of the United States, that are spinning down sperm and finding that they can separate out fractions, as they're called. You know, they can spin the sperm down at a given speed, and they'll separate out at different, um, sort of depths within the test tube that allow them to pull out the sperm on top or below and bias the probability towards male or female births. It's not perfect, it's not 100%. It's a very costly procedure. It's still very controversial. Now, with in vitro fertilization, you can extract eggs. You can do introduce a sperm directly by pipette in process called icSi, or you can set up a sperm race in a dish. And if you get a number of different embryos, meaning the eggs get fertilized, duplicate, and start form a blastocyst, which is a ball of cells, early embryo. Then you can do karyotyping. So you can look for xx or xy, select the xy, which then would give rise to a male offspring and implant that one. So there is that kind of sex selection with respect to position. There's a lot of lore that if the woman is on top or the woman's on the bottom, or whether or not the penetration is from behind, whether or not it's going to be male or female offspring. And frankly, the data are not great, as you can imagine, because those would be interesting studies to run. Perhaps.
Speaker B: There is studies.
Speaker A: There is paper, there are some, but they're not.
Speaker B: I guess there's more lore than science.
Speaker A: And there's a lot of. And there are a lot of other variables that are hard to control. So, for instance, if it's ejaculation during intermission, during the. During sex penetration, et cetera, then you can't measure, for instance, sperm volume as opposed to when it's ivf. And they can actually measure how many milliliters, how many forward motile sperm. It's hard to control for certain things and just can vary between individuals and even from one ejaculation to the next. Okay, so there's too many variables. However, the position thing is interesting in the following way, and then I'll answer whether or not you can bias towards a female. As long as we're talking.
Speaker B: I have other questions about sex, but.
Speaker A: As long as we're talking about sexual position, there are data that support the idea that in order to increase the probability of successful fertilization, that indeed, the woman should not stand upright after sex and should right after. Right after the man has ejaculated inside her and should adjust her pelvis, say, 15 degrees upwards. I mean, some of the fertility experts, mds, will say that's crazy, but others that I sought out, and not specifically for this answer, but for researching that episode, said that, yeah, what you're talking about is trying to get the maximum number of sperm, and it's contained in semen. And yes, the semen can leak out. And so keeping the pelvis tilted for about 15 degrees, for about 15 minutes, obviously tilted in the direction that would have things running upstream, not downstream, so to speak, would. Gravity. It's real, you know, so. So for maximizing fertilization, you know, the. The doctors I spoke to just said, look, given that if people are trying to get pregnant, what is spending 15 minutes on their back? You know, this sort of thing. Okay, so then with respect to female getting a female offspring or xx female offspring selectively. There is the idea that as fathers get older, they're more likely to have daughters as opposed to sons. From the papers I've read is a significant, but still mildly significant result. So with each passing year, this person increases the probability they're going to have a daughter, not a son. So that's interesting, but the probability differences are probably tiny. I mean, it's not, you know, it's a significant, it's not trivial, it's not a trivial difference. But if they want to ensure having a daughter, then they should do IVF and select an xx embryo. And when you go through IVF, they genetically screen them for karyotype, which is xxxyde, and they look at mutations, genotypic mutations, for things like, you know, trisomies and aneuploidies, all the stuff you don't want.
Speaker B: But there is a lot of lore, if you look on the Internet, sure.
Speaker A: Different foods.
Speaker B: So there are a lot of variables.
Speaker A: There's a lot of. But there haven't been systematic studies. So I think probably the best thing to do, unless they're going to do IVF, is just, you know, roll the dice and, you know, I think with each passing year they increase the probability of getting a female offspring. But of course, with each passing year, the egg and sperm quality degrade. So get after it soon.
Speaker B: So I went down a rabbit hole. There's like sexology, there's journals. Oh yeah, on sex.
Speaker A: Sure.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: And some of them not all quite reputable, and some of them really pioneering in the sense that. But they've taken on topics that are considered outside the mainframe of what people talk about, but they're very important. We have episodes coming out soon with, for instance, the head of male urology, sexual health and reproductive health at Stanford, Michael Eisenberg, but also one with a female urologist, sexual health reproductive health doctor Reena Malik, who has a quite active YouTube presence. She does these really dry scientific presentation, but very nice. She has a lovely voice, but she'll be talking about erections or squirting or all this. She does very Internet type content, but she's a legitimate urologist, reproductive health expert. And in the podcast we did talk about both male and female orgasm. We talked a lot about sexual function dysfunction. We talked a lot about pelvic floor. One interesting factoid is that only 3% of sexual dysfunction is hormonal endocrine in nature. It's more often related to some pelvic floor or vasculature, blood flow related or other issue and then when Eisenberg came on the podcast, he said that far less sexual dysfunction is psychogenic in origin than people believe. That far more of it is pelvic floor, neuro and vascular. So there are the myths of. I mean, it's not saying that psychogenic dysfunction doesn't exist, but that a lot of the sexual dysfunction that people assume is related to hormones or that is related to psychogenic issues are related to vascular or neural issues. And the good news is that there are great remedies for those. Both those episodes detail some of the more salient points around what those remedies are and could be one of the, again, factoids. But it was interesting that a lot of people have pelvic floor issues and they think that their pelvic floors are messed up. They go on the Internet, they learn about kegels, kegels. It turns out that some people need kegels. They need to strengthen their pelvic floor. Guess what? A huge number of people with sexual and urologic dysfunction have pelvic floors that are too tight, and kegels are going to make them far worse, and they actually need to learn to relax their pelvic floor. And so seeing a pelvic floor specialist is important. I think in the next 510 years, were going to see a dramatic shift towards more discussion about sexual and reproductive health in a way that acknowledges that, yeah, the clitoris comes from the same origin tissue as the penis. And in many ways, the neural innervation of the two, while clearly different, has some overlapping features that there's going to be discussion around anatomy and hormones and pelvic floors in a way that's going to erode some of the cloaking of these topics, because they've been cloaked for a long time. And there's a lot of, like, well, let's just call it what is. There's a lot of bullshit out there about what's what. And now the hormonal issues, by the way, just to clarify, can impact desire. So a lot of people who have lack of desire as opposed to lack of anatomical function, this could be male or female, that. That can originate with either things like SSRI's or hormonal issues. And so we talk about that as well. So it's a pretty vast topic.
Speaker B: Okay. You're one of the most productive people I know. What's the secret to your productivity? How do you maximize the number of productive hours in a day? You're a scientist, you're a teacher, you're a very prolific educator.
Speaker A: Well, thanks for the kind words. I struggle like everybody else, but I am pretty relentless about meeting deadlines. I miss them sometimes, but sometimes that means cramming, sometimes that means starting early.
Speaker B: But has that been hard? Sorry to interrupt. With the podcast, there are certain episodes, I mean, you're like taking just incredibly difficult topics and you know, they're going to be, there's going to be a lot of really good scientists listening to those with a very skeptical and careful eye. Like how hard do you struggle meeting that deadline?
Speaker A: Sometimes, yes. We've pushed out episodes because I want more time with them. I also, I haven't advertised this, but I have another fully tenured professor that's started checking my podcasts and helping me find papers. He's a close friend of mine. He's an incredible expert in neuroplasticity and that's been helpful. But I research all my, I do all the primary research for the episodes myself. Although my niece has been doing a summer internship with me and finding amazing papers she did last summer as well. She's really good at it. Just sick, that kid on the Internet. And she gets great stuff.
Speaker B: Casket just going on tangents here. What's the hardest? Finding the papers or understanding what a.
Speaker A: Paper is saying or finding the best papers? Yeah, because you have to read a bunch of reviews, figure out who's getting cited, call people in a field, make sure that this is the stuff. I mean, I did this episode recently on ketamine. About ketamine. I wasn't on ketamine. And there's this whole debate about S versus Ark Sr ketamine. And I called two clinical experts at Stanford. I had a researcher at UCLA help me. Even then, a few people had gripes about it. I don't think they understood a section that I was perhaps could have been clearer about. But yeah, you're always concerned that people won't either won't get it or I won't be clear. So the researching is mainly about finding the best papers. And then I'm looking for papers that establish a thoroughness of understanding that are interesting. Obviously it's fun to get occasionally look at some of the odder or more progressive papers that are what's new in a field and then where there are actionable takeaways to really and export those with a lot of thoughtfulness. I mean, I think that going back to the productivity thing, I do, I get up, I look at the sun. I don't stare at the sun, but I get my sunshine. It all starts with a really good night's sleep. I think that's really important to understand. So much so that if I wake up and I don't feel rested enough, I'll often do a non sleep, deep rest, yoga, nidra, or go back to sleep for a little bit, get up, really prioritize one big block of work for the thing that I'm researching. I think a little bit of anxiety and a little bit of concern about deadline helps. Turning the phone off helps realizing that those peak hours, whenever they are for you, you do not allow those hours to be invaded unless there's a, you know, a nuclear bomb goes off. And a nuclear bomb is just a phraseology for it could be family crisis would be, you know, would be good justification if there's an emergency, obviously. But, um, it's all about focus. It's all about focus in the moment. It's not even so much about how many hours you log. It's really about focus in the moment. How much total focus can you give to something? And then I like to take walks and think about things and sometimes talk about them in my voice recorder. So I'm just always churning on it all the time. And then, of course, learning to turn it off and engage with people socially and not be podcasting 24 hours a day in your head is key. But I think I love learning and researching and finding those papers and the information, and I love teaching it. And these days I use a whiteboard before I start. I don't have any notes, no teleprompter. Then the whiteboard that I use beforehand is to really sculpt out the different elements and the flow. Get the flow right and move things around. The whiteboard is such a valuable tool. Then take a couple pictures of that. When I'm happy with it, put it down on the desk. And these are just bullet points. And then just churn through. And just churn through. And nothing feels better than researching and sharing information. And as you did, I grew up writing papers, and it's hard, and I like the friction of, like, can't, you know, I want to get up when you use the bathroom. When I was in the college, I was trying to make up deficiencies from my lack of attendance in high school, so much so that I would set a timer. I wouldn't let myself get up to use the bathroom, even. Never had an accident. But I was, you know, I mean, it was like I listened to music, classical music, rancid, a few other things, some Bob Dylan maybe thrown in there and just study and just. And it felt. And then you hit the two hour mark. And you're ahead. Pain. And then you get up, like, use the bathroom. Like, that felt so good. There's something about the human brain that likes these kind of friction points and working through them, and you just have to work through them. So, yeah, I'm productive, and my life is arranged around it. And, you know, that's been a bit of a barrier to personal life at times, but my life's been arranged around it. I've set up everything so that I can learn more, teach more, including, you know, some of my home life, and. But I do, you know, still watch chimpanzee, still got time to watch Jim Papa, look. The great Joe Strummer. Right? Clash. Or my favorite, mescaleros. He said, you know, this famous strummer quote, no input, no output. So you need. You need experience. You need outside things in order to foster the process. But, uh, yeah, just nose to the grindstone, man. I don't. I don't know. And that's what. And that's what I'm happy to do with my life. I don't think anyone should do that just because. But this is how I'm showing up. And, you know, if you don't like me, then scroll. Whether they say swipe left, swipe right. I don't know. I'm not on the apps, the dating apps. So that's the other thing I keep waiting for when, um, listens to Lex Freeman podcast is a checkbox on, like, hinge or bumble or whatever it is. But I don't even know are those that are field. I don't know what the. What are the apps now?
Speaker B: I've never used an app, and I always found troublesome how little information is provided on apps.
Speaker A: Well, they're the ones that are, like, a stocked lake, like Raya. You know, it's like they sort of, like companies will actually fill them with people that look a certain way, and.
Speaker B: Soon it'll be filled with Aihdem. Oh, yeah, that's what you said. Oh, that's a heartbreak within that.
Speaker A: Well, I. You know, I'm guilty of liking real human interaction.
Speaker B: Have you tried AI interaction?
Speaker A: No, but I have a feeling you're gonna convince me to one day.
Speaker B: Yeah. I've also struggled finishing projects that are new. There are some. Something new. Like, for example, some. One of the things that really struggled finishing is something that's in Russian, that requires translation and overdub and all that kind of stuff. The other project I've been working on for, like, over at least a year and off and on. But trying to finish is something we've talked about in the past is. I'm still on it. Project on Hitler in World War Two. I've written so much about it, and I just don't know why I can't finish it. I have trouble. Like, really. I think I'm terrified being in front of the camera like this. Like this or so. Well, actually, no, no. Solo.
Speaker A: Well, if you want to do solo. And seriously, because we've done this before, right? Our clandestine study missions. I'll. I'm happy to sit in the corner and work on my book or do something if you want to, if it.
Speaker B: Feels good, just for the feeling of somebody else.
Speaker A: Definitely.
Speaker B: What do you. I mean, how do you. You don't seem to. You seem to have been fearless to just sit in front of the camera by yourself to do the episode.
Speaker A: Yeah, it was weird. I mean, the first year of the podcast, it just spilled out of me. It was just. I had all that stuff I was so excited about. I'd been talking to everyone who would listen, and anyone even went, who. They'd run away. I'd keep talking, you know, before there was ever a camera, wasn't on social media. 2019. I posted a little bit 2020, as you know, started going on podcasts. But, yeah, I had. So I just. I just. The zest and delight in this stuff. It's like circadian rhythms. I'm going to tell you about this stuff. I just felt like here was the opportunity and just let it burst. And then as we've gotten into topics that are a little bit further away from my home knowledge, you know, I still get super excited about it. It's music in the brain episode I've been researching for a while now. I'm just so hyped about it. It's so, so interesting. There's so many facets. Singing versus improv, improvisational. Excuse me, music versus. I'm listening to music versus learning music. I mean, it just goes on and on. There's just so much that's so interesting. I just can't get enough. And I think, I don't know. You put a camera in front of me, I sort of forget about it, and I'm just trying to just teach.
Speaker B: Yeah. So that's a different. That's interesting.
Speaker A: I mean, forget the camera.
Speaker B: Maybe I need to find that joy as well. But, like, for me, a lot of the joys in the. In the writing and the camera, there's something.
Speaker A: Well, the best lecturers, as you know, and you're a phenomenal lecturer. So you embody this as well. But when I teach at Stanford, I was directing this course in neuroanatomy and neuroscience and for medical students, and I noticed that the best lecturers would come in and they're teaching the material from a place of deep understanding, but they're also experiencing it as a first time learner at the same time. So it's just sort of embodying the delight of it, but also the authority over the. Not authority, but the sort of mastery of the material. And it's really the delight in it that the students are linking onto. And of course, they need and deserve the best accurate material, so they have to know what they're talking about. But yeah, just tap into that energy of learning and loving it and people are along for the ride. Or, you know, I get accused of being long winded, but, you know, things get taken out of context that leads to greater misunderstanding. And also I look at, listen, I come from a lineage of three dead advisors. Three, all three. So I don't know when the reaper is coming for me. I'm doing my best to stay alive a long time, but whether or not it's a bullet or a bus or cancer or whatever, or just old age, I mean, I'm trying to get it all out there as best I can. And if it means you have to hit pause and come back a day or two later, that seems like a reasonable compromise to me. I'm not going to go go longer than I need to, and I'm trying to shorten them up. But again, that's kind of how I show up. It's like Tim Armstrong would say about writing songs. I asked him, do you write? How often do you write? Every day. Every day. Has Rick ever stopped creating? No. Has Joe ever stopped preparing for comedy? Are you ever stopping to think about world issues and technology and who you can talk to? I mean, it seems to me you've always got a plan. The inside. The thing I love about your podcast the most, to be honest these days, is the surprise of like, I don't know who the hell is going to be there. It's almost like, like I get a little nervously excited about when a new episode comes. Like, no idea. No idea. And, you know, I mean, I have some guesses based on what you told me during the break. I mean, you've got some people where it's just like, whoa, Lex has went there. Awesome. Can't wait to click. I think that's really cool. You're constantly surprising people, so you're doing it so. Well, it's such a high level. And I think it's also important for people to understand that what you're doing, Lex, there's no precedent for it. Sure, there have been interviews before, there have been podcasts before. There are discussions before, but it's not like how many of your peers can you look to to find out how best to do the content like yours? Zero. There's one peer, you. And so that should give you great peace and great excitement because you're a pioneer. You're literally the tip of the spear. I don't want to take an unnecessary tangent, but I think this might thread together two of the things that we've been talking about, which are, I think, of pretty key importance. One is romantic relationships and the other is creative process and work. And this, again, is something I learned from Rick, but that he and I have gone back and forth on and that I think is worth elaborating on, which is earlier we were saying the best relationship is going to be one where it brings you peace. I think peace also can be translated to, among other things, lack of distraction. So when you're with your partner, can you really focus on them and the relationship? Can you not be distracted by things that you're upset about from their past or from your past with them? And of course, the same is true for them, right? They ideally will feel that way towards you, too. They can really focus. Also, when you're not with them, can you focus on your work? Can you not be worried about whether or not they're okay because you trust that they're an adult and they can handle things, or they will reach out if they need things, they're going to communicate their needs, like an adulthood, but not creating messes just to get attention and things like that, or disappearing for that matter. So peace and focus are intimately related, and distraction is the enemy of peace and focus. So there's something there, I believe, because with people that have the strong generative drive and want to be productive in their home life, in the sense they have a rich family life or partner life, whatever that is, and in their work life, the ability to really drop into the work and like, okay, you might have that sense, like, I hope they're okay or need to check my phone or something, but just know we're good. So peace and focus, I think, and being present are so key. And it's key at every level of romantic relationship, from certainly presence and focus, everything from sex to listening to raising a family to tending to the house and in work, it's absolutely critical. So I think that those things are kind of mirror images of the same thing and they're both important reflections of the other. And when you start to, when work is not going well, then the focus on relationship can suffer and vice versa.
Speaker B: And it's crazy how important that is, how incredibly wonderful it could be to have a person in your life that kind of enables that creative focus.
Speaker A: Yeah. And you supply the peace and focus for their endeavors, whatever those might be. I mean, that symmetry there, because clearly people have different needs and the need to just really trust. When Lex is working, he's in his generative mode and I know he's good. And so then they feel sure they've contributed to that. But then also what you're doing is supporting them in whatever way it happens to be. And I think that sometimes you'll see that people will pair up along, creative, creative or musical, musical or computer scientists. But I think, again, going back to this Conti episode on relationships, that the superficial labels are less important, it seems, than just the desire to create that kind of home life and relationship together. And as a consequence, the work mode. And for some people, both people aren't working and sometimes they are. But I think that's the good stuff and I think that's the big learning in all of it, is that the further along I go with each birthday, I guarantee you're going to be like, what I want is simpler and simpler and harder and harder to create, but oh, so worth it.
Speaker B: The inner and the outer piece. It's been over two years, I think, since Costello passed away.
Speaker A: It still tears me up. I cried about him today. I cried about him today. It's proportional to the love. But yeah, I'll cry about right now. If I think about it wasn't putting him down, it wasn't the act of him dying, any of that. Actually, that was a beautiful experience. I didn't expect it to be, but it was in my place when I was living in Topanga during the pandemic where we launched the podcast. And I did it at home and he hated the vet, so I did it at home and he gave out this huge right at the end. And I could just tell he had been in just not a lot of pain, fortunately, but he had just been working so hard just to move at all. And the craziest thing happened, Lex. It was unbelievable. I've never had an experience like this. I expected my heart to break and I've felt a broken heart before. I felt it, frankly, when my parents split, I felt it when Harry shot himself. I felt it when Barbara died and felt it when, you know, when Ben went so, as well and so many friends, like, way too many friends. I mean, the end of 2017, my friend Aaron King, Johnny Fair, John Eickleberry, stomach cancer, suicide, fentanyl. It's like, whoa. All in a frigging week. And I just remember thinking like, what the. But when? Like, and it's just heartbreaking. You just carry that and it's like, uh. But, and that's just a short list, you know? And I don't say that for sob stories, just for a guy that wasn't in the military or didn't grow up in the inner city. Like, it's an unusual number of, like, deaths. Like, close people. When Costello went, the craziest thing happened. My heart warmed up. It heated up and I wasn't on MDMA and I wasn't. I was just. The moment he went, he just went whoosh. And I was like, what the hell is this? And it was just, it was like a supernatural experience to me. I just never had that. I put my grandfather on the ground. I was a pallbearer at the funeral. I've done that more times than I'd like to have ever done it. And it just heated up with Costello and I thought, what the fuck is this? And it was almost like, and you can make up these, we make up these stories about what it is, but it was almost like he was like, all right, I have to be careful because I will cry here and I don't want to. It was almost like he was like all that effort because I put in putting so much effort into him. I was like, all right, you get that back. It was like the giant friggin thank you. And it was incredible, you know? And I'm not embarrassed to shed a tear or two about it if I have to. Like, I was like, holy shit. Like, that's how close I was to that animal.
Speaker B: Where do you think? Where do you think you can find that kind of love again, man?
Speaker A: I don't know. I mean, when. Excuse me for welling up, but it was just, I mean, it's a frigging dog, right? I get it. But for me, it was the first real home I ever had. But when Costello went, it was like, we had had this home in Topanga, we had set it up and we're like. And he was just so happy there. And I think it just, I don't know, it was like this weird victory slash massive loss. We did it eleven years fucking did everything, everything to make him as comfortable as possible. And he was super loyal, beautiful, animal, but also just funny and fun. And I was like, I did it. I gave as much of myself to this being as a human. I felt I could without making it detracting from the rest of my life. And so I don't know. When I think about Barbara especially, I well up, and it's hard for me. I mean, I talked to her before she died, and that was a brutal conversation, saying goodbye to someone, especially with kids, and that was hard. I think that really flipped a switch in me where I'm like, I always knew I wanted kids. I'd say, I want kids. I want a lot of kids. That flipped a switch in me. I was like, I want kids. I want my own kids.
Speaker B: You might be able to find that kind of love.
Speaker A: Yeah, I think because it was the caretaker, it wasn't about what he gave me all that time. And the more I could take care of him and see him happy, the better I felt. It was crazy, and. I don't know. So I miss him every day. Every day. I miss him every day.
Speaker B: You got a heart that's so full of love. I can't wait for you to have kids, you to be a father.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: I can't wait to do this.
Speaker A: When I'm ready for it, you know? When God decides I'm ready, I'll have.
Speaker B: Him, and then I will still beat you to it. As I told you many times before.
Speaker A: I think you should absolutely have kids. I mean, look at the people in our life, because we're kind of the. In case you haven't realized it already, like, we're the younger of the podcasters, but, you know, like Joe and I, Peter and Sagura and, you know, and the rest. Right? They're like the. They're like the tribal elders, right? And we're, you know, we're not the youngest in the crew, but we're. If you look at all those guys, they all have kids. They all adore their kids, and their kids bring tremendous meaning to their life. Like, be. We'd be morons if, you know, if you didn't go off and start a family. I didn't start off star family. And, yeah, I think that's. That's the goal. I mean, I think of the goals. That's one of them.
Speaker B: The kids not only make them their life more joyful and brings love to their life, it also makes them more productive, makes them better people. All that. It's like, it's it's kind of obvious.
Speaker A: Yeah, I think that's what Costello wanted. I think I have this story in my head that he was so like, okay, like, take this. Like, yeah, yeah.
Speaker B: And don't.
Speaker A: And lord knows, don't fuck this up.
Speaker B: Andrew, brother, this is incredible.
Speaker A: Love you too. Thanks. I appreciate you.
Speaker B: Let's. We will talk often on each other's podcasts for many years to come. Yes, many, many years to come.
Speaker A: Thank you. Thanks for. For having me on here. And there are no words for how much I appreciate your example and your friendship. So love you, brother.
Speaker B: Love you too. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Andrew Huberman. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Albert Camus. In the midst of winter I found there was within me an invincible summer and that makes me happy for it says that no matter how hard the world pushes against me, within me there is something stronger, something better pushing right back. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
