Transcription for B-Team Jiu Jitsu： Craig Jones, Nicky Rod, and Nicky Ryan ｜ Lex Fridman Podcast #363.mp3:
Full transcript: How would a kangaroo attack a human? Knock them down and then they choke them? The kangaroos? Do they choke each other? Yeah. They don't choke each other. You don't believe me? You wanna watch your video? They choke each other out. I've seen this. Yeah. I mean, probably the most annoying one was obviously the one where I had Gordon Amber. I was like, tap, bro. And he wouldn't tap, so I let him out. I didn't get surgery. I didn't do essentially any rehab. I just have no acl in my left leg. So what's it like having no HCL surgeon? Guys, you've got two options. Surgery, rehab. Only suddenly Nikki goes, I'll do nothing. Yeah. I mean, what could possibly go wrong if you're the world's best grappler hates you, and you're gently provoking him behind the scenes every day? Well, I mean, in Texas. And you've stolen his brother, held him for ransom. It is like a story of a shitty western. The last part of a difficult wake up for me is I try to find a sad movie and at least cry about a pound out. That really gets me over the line. What are the rules in the streets? Do you think if you were on steroids, you would have finished the joke? I mean, for sure. Who knew that the cure to the dagestani wrestling were the Aussies? The following is a conversation with Craig Jones, Nikki Rod, and Nikki Ryan, who, together with Ethan Krellinston and others, make up the b team, a legendary jiu jitsu team here in Austin, Texas. It was formed after the so called Donahar Death squad, the team, headed by John Donahar, split up into new wave Jiu jitsu and b team Jiu Jitsu, both located here in Austin, Texas. There has been a lot of trash talk back and forth, including accusations of greasing and steroid use. And I, as a practitioner and fan of grappling jiu jitsu and martial arts in general, am here for it to see the best grapplers in history go at it, both on the matae and on instagram. I like the people on both teams and train with both, and am really happy to see the exciting, rapid evolution of the sport that these athletes and coaches are catalyzing. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Craig Jones, Nikki Rod and Nikki Ryan. Craig, can you introduce everyone? Yep. So we got Nikki Rudd here, brown belt two time ADCC silver medalist Nikki Ryan here. That's it. Who are you. And I'm Craig Jones, also two time ADCC silver medalist. Silver medalist. So, the number one loser. Number one loser, and maybe a little bit more. Your bio says, widely known as the black belt slayer. Hails from New Jersey, the land of pizza and biceps. Yes, that's pretty accurate. Okay. You also do carry a gun on you a lot. Yeah, I keep it loaded. You know, keep it on me. Uh huh. You have one today in the car. That was a mistake. That was your first mistake. Yeah. I think you're too close. Very uncomfortable. And you are? Nikki Ryan. What else is there? What else do we know? Gordon Ryan's brother. Gordon Ryan's brother. Waiting for that one. All right, so. And you're all together, part of the leadership of the b team here in Austin. Let's just get out some introductory questions. What, in general, accomplishment of the things you mentioned you're most proud of? I mean, I'm proud just to not have to work a full time job just to get by on the bullshit I've done so far. Yeah. Honestly, just making money off a thing you love. Exactly. Yeah. When was the first time you made money on a thing you love? Probably a jujitsu tournament, I think maybe in Abu Dhabi, where I won a $1,000. Thought I was rich. Yeah. Yeah. What'd you spend $1,000 on? Probably something bad. Probably drugs or something at the time. Maybe blew it at the afterparty. That's a good introduction to Craig. So what about you? When's the first time you made money with Hanji jitsu? Or what's actually stepping back? Like, what's the thing you're most proud of? Is it a similar kind of thing? I think. I think I'm most proud of is. I mean, for sure, two ADCC silver medals, which hurts because you're so close to getting that gold, but, you know, it takes time. I'm understanding that, you know, sport of jujitsu takes quite a while to be at the tip top, to be the absolute best. So I'm just being consistent in my training and my craft, and I'll get that number one spot one day. What failure or loss is the most painful to you? I don't know. I have a pretty short term memory, so my losses, I just, like, I'll just forget about. Yeah, I mean, for sure. My loss AT. At this past ADCC in the finals. You know, that one sung a bit. Cause I definitely thought I was going to win. I mean, like, it takes a while to produce the skills or the reactions more so that you need to have to be, you know, to be that number one pound for pound guY. Um, and, you know, uh, pre ADCC, I was coming off an injury, so it took me a little bit to, uh, find the right mentality and physicality that I needed in order to, you know, get the wins that required gold. So, yeah, it's just process. IntereSting. You keep saying process, like, it takes a while to build up. So you're not like, thinking of a loss. Like, ADCC is like, uh, a specific failures. You're not. You haven't gone long enough in a particular process to being a champ. Well, I mean, for me, I'm coming. I'm closing in on five years of specifically jiu jitsu training. I'm about. About four and a half right now. And, yeah, it's just you kind of. You constantly have these ups and downs in training where, like, as long as you stay consistent, you'll have a gradual raise. But, you know, it's still. You have these peaks and lows and, you know, just. Just trying to get better every day. I'm definitely not where I will be in a few years, in a few years from now, but striving to get there. Are you actually a brown belt or was that a joke? Brown belt. Yeah, you're a brown belt. Like, how many stripes? No stripes. No stripes. Stripeless. Okay. Is that part of the process that you're working through? Definitely part of the process. I mean, I think a black belt is just based upon how much knowledge you have. Obviously, like, you know, if you're talking competitive wise, like, from when I started, I was able to beat most black belts. That's just kind of how I was gifted from my. My wrestling experience. And, you know, the time will come when it's right, but I'm not in a rush at all. I'm continuing. I just kind of take every day for what it is and try to improve upon that. I mean, I want to give him the black belt. Nikki Ryan says he's not ready. What is? Are you guys like us? No. Gee, folks, do you take that seriously, like, the black belt or, like, how much does it come into play? Into? Yeah, I mean, it's like Nikki Rod said, you know, it's based off of knowledge, not just, you know, what you do out on the competition mats. Cause, you know, like you said, he had years of wrestling experience, and obviously he's very physically gifted. So we grade based off of the amount of knowledge that you have. Like, how do you measure knowledge? I think teaching is a good measurement. Of it, like, how well you're able to show the moves and, you know, really make sure that you have an understanding of what you're doing. Yeah, it's an interesting rank. It's like, it's something that takes many years to accomplish, and for a lot of people, it's truly meaningful. It's like it represents a particular step in a journey. But for you guys, it's almost, like, different because you've been so focused on competition that I guess if you take it seriously, it is a big step for you, too, like, as martial artists, that's bigger than just being, like, top of the world competitors, right? So I thought it was a joke. You guys are actually taking it seriously like that. He's a brown belt. He's a brown belt. And you're taking seriously the rank of black belt. And, like, it's part of. It's part of your journey. I think by the time I get a black belt, I'll be number one, pound for a pound. I think it'd be pretty nice to accomplish that as a brown belt and then maybe toss a black belt on. Top, maybe get promoted on the podium. What do you guys. Do you love winning or hate losing more? I definitely don't hate losing. If it pays the bills, I don't mind. Oh, really? Yeah. But honestly, if I win, I feel more relief than anything. Rather than, like, excitement and stuff, I'm like, oh, fuck, thank God that's over. You know, I hate losing for sure, but I understand that it's necessary to get, you know, to get to where you want to be. Um, and then winning is like, I mean, what? I think winning is probably the closest you could think you can get to, like, heroin or something. Cause, I mean, we're on a, like, if you do have extreme success in a torment that you've been, you know, adamant about training for and competing in for a while, and you end up winning it. I mean, I feel like you're on that high for days at a time afterwards. Heroin's gotta be better. You think so? I'm. I'm a stick with no, but I'm. Not gonna suck dick to win. You suck it for heroin. I guess that's a good point. Yeah, but, you know, like, because you. You come from a little bit of the wrestling culture. One of the things I really love is at the end of the match when they lose, they just. There's no. They just run off. They're, like, almost pissed off. It's like some mixture of anger and frustration at themselves. I think I think sometimes that people, like, freak out on the mat, and I think that's just a. To show everybody, like, they're acting like they cared a lot and really, maybe they didn't work enough to, you know, get to where they want to, where they expect it to be, and they lost, and then they had this big boost of emotion, like, after they're. After they lost. But, uh, yeah, I mean, I think you just cry in the mirror and not to everybody else. You know what? Have you ever cried watching a movie? I don't think I've ever cried, period. Okay. Have you cried watching a movie? Not yet. Not yet. The notebook. I try to avoid those lines. It's actually. I lie, actually. Titanic. The last part of a difficult wake up for me is I try to find a sad movie and at least cry about a pound out. That really gets me over the line. Low energy, cutting the tears. There's other following liquids I could talk to you about, but let's just continue on low energy. What about you, Nikki? Love of winning versus hate of losing. I'm a very competitive person, so I for sure hate losing more than I like winning. I do think it's something that's kind of held me back over the past few years because it makes it so that I'm not as active as I should be, because it's like, I really hate that feeling of after a match that you just lost. So it kind of prevents me from competing. So it's definitely something I need to work past. So when you think about a competition, the possibility of losing, which is always there in competition, is the thing that, like, weighs heavy on you in the months and weeks leading up to it. Yeah. My whole life, you know, my financial stability, everything depends on, you know, my ability to go out there and compete and my ability to teach. So, you know, it's. It's a huge hit to the brand if you lose. So, you know, leading up to matches, that's. That's definitely something that's in my mind. I know you. So you guys are, like, world class athletes, but for me, more like a hobbyist competitor. I compete a lot. The thing I was. Cause I really wanted to win. The thing I was probably most afraid of is not just losing, but, like, embarrassing myself. Yeah. Even actually winning by stalling. That was the thing I hated the most about myself in terms of crying in the mirror, is, like, being too afraid to take risks after I'm up on two points or something. I think you gotta. In competition, sometimes it's good to take the emotion out of it. It's too easy sometimes to think about all my girls in the crowd. My family's watching. I wanna win cause they're there. But at the highest level, if you're emotional at all, no, that's affecting you. Yeah. That's tough, though. That's tough. Especially, like, leading up to when you're on the map, maybe. But leading up to it, I think. It'S okay to be emotional prior, like, you know, if we know ADCC or is coming up and we have a big match, like, definitely. I'll go out in practice and I'll. I'll visualize. I'll put myself in that competition. That way, when it's game time, it's like I've been there a thousand times already. So not the actual competition, but even leading up to it, like, stepping on the mat, like, all the walk. Walk towards it, all that. All that stuff, like, I'll do the same exact warm up for weeks on end until my competition day comes. That way, you know, when I compete, I'm just like, oh, it's another Tuesday at practice. What about you, Craig? How do you prepare mentally for a tournament like ADCC? I push it completely out of my mind. Don't even think about it. Try to avoid any visualization, any rituals, warm ups, anything like that. Block it out until the last second. Yeah, try not to think about it. I just got a training to have fun, learn a bit. So I try to approach competition the exact same way. I don't warm up at training. Do very little warm up for competition. Uh huh. And, uh, you just step on the mat? Step on the mats. My philosophy is there's no warm ups on the street. We're so vastly different. All right, uh, so you like legit, don't warm up? No, I probably should now I'm 31, but I would just like. In the gym, they get easy the first round, you know? Like, if I look around the room and Nikki Ryan's down, might go, all right, we'll have an easier first round today. So even for, like, the most high stakes matches, you try to push it out? Yeah, I didn't even think about it. What about, like, all the social, like, Instagram posts you have to do about that match? You just make a joke out of it and kind of. Yeah, I mean, kind of pretty silly. You know, we're just wrestling each other. You know, we put the meaning into it. But to someone that doesn't follow the sport, it looks stupid. Well, all of human existence is pretty silly. Like, what are we doing. None of us really know what's going on. We kind of have sex to reproduce. We get hungry, we eat, and then we're all chasing money and cars and whatever the hell in a capitalist society. Or we worship a dictator in a authoritarian regime. Yeah. And then we get off on the. We let power abuse us, and then we just murder others because we get off on it. Yeah. And then eventually all of us will die because the sun will run out of energy, because colonizing other planets is very difficult, so none of it matters. It's a good, good philosophy. It's pretty good. That's exactly what I'm saying. How does the sun run out of energy? You call me there. It'S burnt out. It's a nuclear fusion engine that eventually. Burns out of, like when you get tired of training. Yeah. It's never happened. I try to get tired. I like, dude, it's not working. All right, cool. So you legit don't care about losing. It doesn't weigh heavy on you. I try not to list. Like, if I win, I try to block out all the compliments, all the niceties and stuff. So I try to do the same with losing. It's happened. Move on to the next one. You know, don't dwell on it too. Much and sometimes make a joke out of it. Yeah, exactly. Winning or losing, with the right joke, we can make money off of the event that's just transpired. That's what's most important. Excellent. Thank you. I have a bunch of your merch. Oh, nice. This one's the Jordan Burrows rip off. All I see is silver. The way pronounce Burrows is very sexy. Okay. I throw lines at people and I try to gauge their reaction. Like, sometimes I'll say something to Nikki, and I'll be like, all right, that's probably crossing the line. You know what I mean? We'll tone it down to the public. Yeah. Yeah. So it's not just right. You have to think, is this crossing the line? Yep. Yep. I get as close to it as possible. Yeah. I feel like you can't really cross it. Just a little bit. Just a little bit. Yeah. Okay. Speaking of which, you said that I'm Switzerland in World War two, since I'm friends with both you and Gordon and John. Very rich country. Are you a Hitler or Stalin? By the way, in this analogy, would you like to be Hitler or Stalin? And should you make a t shirt out of it? Or, I mean, a nazi t shirt? I don't know how well that sells. I think it would. You know, I think, let's brainstorm on this one offline. I think since Hitler lost, so he got second place in World war two. That's true. That's true. I think that makes you Hitler anyway, to the degree that you can. Can you tell the story of how the time you've had with the Donna Hart death squad and why you split up? I competed against Gordon for ADCC and Ebi in 2017. And I remember I competed against him at ADCC. And then we had the Ebi event, and then I had a Kasai. I used to compete all the time, every week. I wouldn't even do the preparation or anything. I'd just be, like, trying to do seminars, make money, and then jump in and compete. I remember I showed up to Kasai after I faced him twice, and there were, like, four locker rooms and they put me with all the DDS guys. It was just me and all of dds. And I think we competed the weekend before, so I thought it was going to be super awkward, but it was actually. It was actually pretty chill. And the Kasai was in New York and they suggested to come train that week, so I came, trained, hung out with them a bit. Ultimately, the goal was to move to America and join a bigger team. Just because that flight to Australia is death. Australia is so far away from everywhere. It's kind of flat. Like, not realistic to base yourself in Australia when all the tournaments are in America. And then I went and trained with the guys and they just had a massive, massively deep talent pool in that room. Like, show up to, like, a meant to be 07:00 a.m. actual 08:00 a.m. class on brazilian time. And there'd be, like, 100 people in there, maybe. I don't know how many black belts, but a ton of elite guys. And I was coming from Australia training with Lachlan Giles, but really, that room was pretty shallow and, like, most people had serious jobs and stuff, so it was, like, basically me just training with Lachlan, maybe a couple of other guys, and then to go to New York and have access to a wide array of training partners and guys that are training twice each day. I feel like that's what you really need. You need people that can train as much as you are. Yeah. Humbled. Humble. Humbled in that room at first, for. Sure, because my style at the time was basically a rip off version of what they were doing. Leg locks came in. I remember just watching Eddie Cummings nonstop and just seeing this guy rip people's legs off. And I was like, you know what? That's probably a good move. You know, that looks like an easier path to victory than trying to beat these guys at what they. What they're good at already. You know, my philosophy at the time was, if it's bothering old Brazilians, it's bothering them for a reason, it's probably effective. And that's the path I took to sort of try to rip off their moves, and then, obviously, to go into that room, try to do them to them, it's going to be a bit more difficult. All right, so that's how it started. How did you end up here? How do we end up here? We're in Austin, Texas. I mean, I like to think of Puerto Rico as apocalypse Now. John Danaher as Colonel Kurtzen. Things got very weird in the jungle, and the teams went in two different directions. But honestly, I mean, it's not really my story to tell. I had some issues with some of those people at the time of the split. I got along very well with Jon. I feel like me and him connected very well. I don't know why that was. Maybe it was just because of the. He missed home. He missed a familiar accent, australian, New Zealand accent. But, I mean, I basically followed Nikki, left with Nikki, sort of that core group of guys left with Nikki, and, I mean, I just back there was personal problems. I just backed Nikki, basically. Got it. Just sticking on you for a bit. Is there a part of you that, you know, finds it heartbreaking that dds split up? Does part of you miss working with John and everybody? Now? Can you steel man the case for that? I mean, I miss certain aspects of it, but I also do prefer the freedom of being apart from it. It's obviously a very strict regime under John Danaher. You know, obviously, there's parts of it I miss, the parts that the public doesn't see of John, the behind the scenes banter. I feel like he's very conscious of the image he portrays to the world, but basically, it closed doors. He's always making jokes, always finding, I guess, more in line with the australian kiwi sort of culture, but you don't really see that in the public eye. So that perspective. I do miss that relationship with John in terms of setting aside personal differences. Gordon was a good training partner, definitely a good training partner to train with. But obviously, the negative things we can't really talk about outweighed all of those things, and we obviously had to make a decision to leave. The things that happened in the jungle. The things that happen in the jungle. Should never be spoken of that I. Personally cannot speak of. Yeah. But obviously, I do miss certain aspects. Like, I mean, nothing. Nothing's all bad, nothing's all good, you know? Yeah. This goes back to your, like, everything we're doing is silly. Yeah, exactly. That's why I don't get. People take it so serious. Martial arts so serious. It's just pretty stupid, really. Especially in the gi. It looks just. It looks bad, and then, I mean. It'S pretty silly with. With. And without the gi, it's just a bunch of apes. What's silly about. No. Gee. And what's silly about the Gi? And just mixed and matched bottoms there, you know what I mean? Wait, which one? Sandbag. I see what you're doing, brother. You come to my house and offend my people. All right, we're going to go to every dark place, apparently. Nick, how did you get with dds? What was that journey like? Is there. Try to see if there's things that you remember fondly that you've gotten from the experience. All right, so the way I started training with dds, initially, I was training for, like. Well, initially, I was a bouncer, right? I dropped out of college to pursue this fitness modeling career. I ended up signing with a Wilhelmina models up in New York, and I was, like, trying to get in better shape. And while I was bouncing, kind of the talk of, like, you know, who's tougher came up between the wrestlers and a few of the bouncers that train jiu jitsu, and, you know, they convinced me to go to a practice, and I went my first practice over there, and, uh, I. For the most part, I just controlled everybody, got on top of them, was able to avoid, like, kind of, like, you know, shitty submissions because I had an awareness of the sport, and, you know, I'm a fan of fighting, whatnot. So, um, you know, I kind of understood it pretty well. Um, and then soon after that, I joined a school, and my second week of jujitsu, I started competing. Had pretty good success. You know, I was, like, subbing a few black belts and beating everybody, like, you know, pretty decisively with points and stuff. And, uh, about three months into the training, locally, I got connected with, uh, Gordon, Gordon Ryan and John Danaher up in New York, and I started. I committed to, you know, make the drive up there as many days as I could. At the. At the time, I lived in South Jersey, and it was about a two and a half hour, three hour drive without traffic to New York. Where? Where in south Jersey? Gloucester county. Um, Clayton New Jersey specifically, but Gloucester county, yeah, so it was about 130 miles and without traffic, you know, about two, two and a half hours or so. But on the way back, man, we, it'd be three plus sometimes, you know, you're catching that rush hour. What year was this? Do you remember? This was in 2018 for a bit. I forget how young you are. I was there before, before all that. Alright, cool. Anyway, you're doing the long drive and then. And then. And then what? Yeah, doing the long drive and then, you know, once I won ADCC trials, I was able to make a couple bucks. And then, you know, I got my silver medal at ADCC and I was able to afford to live up there in New York, in north Jersey area. So I lived up there, trained there full time every day. And it was kind of sucked with the team throughout the, throughout the turbulent times. And found ourselves in Austin, in the jungle. In the jungle with the things we. Shall not speak of. What other things that you remember that you've learned from John Donahuer, from your time you spent with him? Yeah, I mean, I definitely learned a ton from Jon and the team as a whole. Like, you know, it's, you have to be the guy that asks questions in that type of environment. Right. Cause there's not, it's not, you're not gonna get singled out to be that specific star or the best guy in the room when you have all these other, you know, stud athletes. So I really had to seek out and figure out the kind of questions that I needed to ask. And once I became a bit more verbal with my training and, you know, I, I'm showing, I'm expressing all my curiosities about grappling to these guys. Definitely helped boost my, boost my technique and my career as a whole. Yeah. Did you understand what kind of stuff, like, technically you want to get good at what fits your body, what, like, what would be good for you, what are your weaknesses and all that. So initially, and when I started grappling, I had an innate ability to just get to opponents back. So I was like, all right, I'm good at getting to the back. Let me get, let me perfect. Controlling the back and then submitting opponent via rear naked choke. And then besides that, I really focus on leg lock defense. And then eventually came the rotty lock pass where, you know, I'm, I'm really good at body lock. Passing my opponents now and then and, yeah, just takes a quite a long time because you have to find, uh, different sequences and then there's always these, uh, an abundance of opportunities that your opponent gets from these specific sequences. So takes a while. Is there part of you that finds the fact that dgs split up heartbreaking? Um, I definitely, you know, having one person to go to that runs practice every day, that's, you know, consistent. Um, it was definitely. It was definitely, definitely a gift. But now I'm also gifted with many, many other partners. I have Nikki Ryan, um, you know, Craig Jones. Craig Jones. Yeah, yeah. We have Ethan Crowseen, Damien Anderson. So a full team of knowledgeable athletes that I can continue to go to with multiple questions. But, yeah, definitely, definitely. It took me some time to adjust to training or to learning from, you know, specifically my team. And not just one person. We should mention for people just listening. Cause you can't visually see that Nikki Ryan is currently terrified and Craig Jones. Jones is currently enjoying the fact that. But anyway, can you talk about your Nikki? Can you talk about your time with DDS? I started training when I was, like, around 13. My brother Gordon had started prior to me, and I really just went into training just as a means to exercise and lose weight at the beginning because I was pretty fat as a kid. So I went to the first class, loved it, and then just started training every day at Gary's gym, Brunswick. And then during the summer when I would get off from school, they would take me up to New York to train under John. And, you know, I just absolutely loved it. I knew what I wanted to do with my life at a young age, so I ended up dropping out of school, actually, after my freshman year in high school. So, yeah, at 15, I ended up dropping out and just pursuing jiu jitsu full time, you know, training every day up in the blue basement. What aspect of jiu jitsu was made? YouTube. Know that this is the thing for you. It's just something I just enjoyed being, you know, like, on the mats every day. I love that there's, you know, a problem solving aspect to it. So it's, you know, it's mentally challenging. It's physically challenging. Helps me get in shape, so I just. Yeah, right off the bat, I knew I loved it. Okay, so then we'll go to the jungle. What happened in the jungle? And in general, like, I like this. I like this, like this, like, shroud of mystery that she'll never be penetrated. That should never be like, we've got a book deal. It's coming. Obviously left high school. He's not writing it. Okay, I'll do the russian translation. Okay, so what are. What are things that you enjoy that you remember from working with John Donahara. Yeah, I mean, you know, obviously he's considered one of the best coaches in the world, you know, very charismatic guy when you see him in person. You know, I pretty much was, you know, kind of raised in the dds, you know, that's where I spent the, the majority of my time every day. So I obviously had very deep connections, you know, with John, my brother Gary, you know, even Eddie Cummings and stuff back then. So obviously I miss interacting with those guys every day. And, you know, it's like they said, it's good to have somebody to kind of crack the whip at you every day. And John was very good at that. When you're, like, younger in your teenage years, you can kind of. You like, have to get humbled, right? There's like a process to that. Yeah, for sure. And it's a pretty good room to get humbled in, I guess. Yeah, exactly. I mean, I started training with them just when, like, everybody started to break out. Gary was like the biggest name at the time just because he had 180 cc trials already and he had a crazy match with Kron at Crown, Gracie at ADCC, but Eddie was just starting to break out. Gordon just started winning Ebi. So I started training under John, you know, right when, when everything was exploding. What are the good things about life about jiu jitsu you learned from your brother? Both me and my brother never really wanted to, you know, work a full time job doing something that we hate. And he was always, you know, a very confident person, so he just went, you know, full, fully started pursuing jiu jitsu. So I'm very happy that, you know, he did that and I ended up following in his footsteps because you can ask these guys, I'm a lazy sack of shit out of. Outside of the mat. So that's, that's definitely one thing that I'm very grateful for, that he paved the way. Like, you can, you can make money doing stuff you love. Yeah, exactly. And he was, he was a big reason, you know, why my parents eventually let me drop out of school, because, you know, when, when they were coming up, there was no money in the sport. It was very hard to make a full living. Like, if you wanted to actually make a living, you'd eventually have to transfer to MMA. And I feel like Gordon and Gary and those guys were some of the first people to make a very good living off of just jiu jitsu. At this party, you find it heartbreaking that you've split up from DDS but also from your brother in terms of spending time in the mat every day? Yeah, for sure. You know, I mean, growing up, you know, obviously he's my big brother. I looked up to him a lot, so I definitely, like I said, I miss interacting with those guys. I was pretty much raised in that blue basement. John was like a father figure to me, so I definitely miss seeing those guys every day. Do you have animosity towards Gordon, and does he have animosity toward you, and what is the source of that? And do you think you'll ever be able to forgive each other? Definitely. Initially, during the initial split, we definitely hated each other at the beginning, but it's definitely started to calm down, actually, just prior to all this social media drama that's going on currently, he had reached out to me, and that was literally the first time that we have actually talked since. Since the split happened. So we didn't talk to each other for. Was it now, like, almost two years? And that was the first time that, you know, we interacted again. And overall, you know, he wasn't, you know, aggressive towards me. I wasn't aggressive towards him. You were cracking some jokes. So hopefully the animosity is going down. There's this godfather quote that wrote down, rewatched it from the Don, from Don Corleone. Vita Corleone. The strength of a family, like the strength of an army, lies in its loyalty to each other. Is there some aspect of family that you miss of the blood that kind of connects you, that you can count on? Yeah, my parents, they both raised us. That family is everything. You never betray your family or anything like that. So I definitely miss them from time to time. Okay. Imagine you're, like, 40 years from now, sitting on a porch with a shotgun, drinking whiskey, looking over, like, all the land you've conquered. Looking back to this moment, is the reason you split up a bullshit reason, or is it a good reason from the perspective of the king who has now conquered the lands, have proven himself, have done everything? I think it was definitely, like, a justifiable reason for the team splitting. Like, it just with the way things were going, it just was not going to work with, you know, all of us in the same room together. It started, you know, affecting training. People didn't feel comfortable and things like. So I definitely think that it was a justifiable reason to split. The things that happened in the jungle. Yeah. To be told about in the book. Is it gonna be an audiobook or is it just gonna be, and who's gonna voice it might be a play, a musical. Yeah, on Broadway. How's your singing voice? Mine's not so good, but Nikki has a beautiful voice. Does he? Of an angel, Nikki. I bet. Okay. Speaking of the social media drama, I should mention that I've talked to recently to Gordon a bunch. I've talked to him about talking to you guys, and he's had nothing but really nice things to say about you, Nikki Ryan. And he has had nothing but bad things. What was some of the things? Well, let's just go to the social media first, because the social media stuff that he said publicly is just like a warm up. It's like foreplay, I guess. So Gordon sent you, Nikki Rod flowers for Valentine's Day. Posting on Instagram, quote, I've been fucking him in every round and competition since we met in 2018. The least I can do is buy him flowers. We didn't get the flowers. No. Yeah, that was the question. Did you get the flowers? You never got the flowers? He sent it to the wrong address. He did? Yeah. Where do you think he sent it? It was close, but it was wrong. Did you appreciate the romantic gesture? I did. I was looking forward to the flowers and potentially chocolates in there, but, you know, it was a bit of a letdown. Can you describe your recent match against Gordon? The Ebi match. Okay, so Ebi match on UFC fight balance was a 20 minutes match. And immediately, you know, match starts. I pull guard, and then I stand up, he pulls guard, and we have this kind of, like, back and forth where he's trying to dig for under hooks, trying to get on top of me, and he can't really find success. And now and. And then in the midst of me trying to work my body lock pass, uh, Gordon's able to under hook a leg, and we end up in a leg entanglement. And then I'm able to transfer that leg entanglement to a 50 50 position. Still, like, it's still in the leg entanglement. Uh, from that 50 50 position, I'm able to, uh, separate his feet and. And actually get a few pops. And he actually said I broke his foot in that exchange with a toehold. The toe hold. Yep. And, uh, you know, after. After that, um, we had a bit more. I was. I was just being, uh, working on top positions, trying get my body lock time runs out, and we go to overtime. In overtime. Can you hold on a second? Actually, what does it mean to break a leg? Was. I was very confused about. Okay, so is this, like, a expression or. What do you mean when you broke. Which part breaks in a toehold. Okay, so in a toehold, uh, there's a few different grades of it. Like, you could get a few pops and have some. Have some, you know, walking issues. Um, and people consider that a break. And then you could break it fully and have your foot be like a limp noodle, you know, I think what goes Achilles, what is the front of the Achilles or something? I mean, probably the ligaments. I mean, it's funny, like, a lot of people say they broke something, but, like, to me, you break bones, you tear ligaments. So I would imagine you probably had a grade three tear. Grade three. How hard do you think is it? I always wondered that with, like, a straight footlock, how hard is it to break the shin or, like, the actual bones versus to tear stuff? Depends how many steroids they're on and obviously how much you're on. You're one of the few guys that have actually broken bones in competition. Yeah. Have I? Oh, yeah, Vin, a couple, yeah. Which bone did you break? Spiral fracture of the fibula. Is it a twisting? How did you break it? Oh, it was a heel hook. Vinny always used to say, heel hooks don't work, leg locks don't work. But unfortunately, age gets the best of all of us. I think he had some mileage on those ligaments. Yeah. And the bone, I guess. Yeah. So it's actually, what, the bone? Yeah. His ankle, like, disconnected from the tibia and the fibula. But the fibula definitely snouts pretty bad there. That's fascinating, the dynamics of that. Okay. Anyway, it went to overtime. What happened in overtime? Okay, what happened overtime? Let's see. Trying to hang. Oh, okay. I go defense first. Uh, whistle blows. I'm able to escape in, like, 17 seconds. And then immediately after, I go on his back, and he gets out in exactly 17 seconds. I'm like, shit. All right. I thought I had a good start. And then, uh, he gets on my back right after that, and, uh, he's able to ride me out for pretty much the entire round after that. He, uh, I got back on his back, he escapes, and maybe like, a minute and some change. Uh, I think where I went wrong in the overtime is I should have. I should have been less adamant about chasing the submission and more aware of collecting time. If I kind of diverted my attention towards acquiring, you know, time on the clock, it would have been, you know, more in my favor. But, yeah, at the end of my overtime round, I would. I'm able to lock up a rear naked choke over the face, but there just wasn't enough time to fully finish. You know, I got a few seconds of squeeze in there. I didn't have enough time to adjust and. Go ahead. Do you think if you're on steroids, you would have finished the choke? I. Yeah, I mean, for sure. For sure. That's what I thought. If you're on gear it, you're. You're changing the biology of your body. You're adjusting your DNA for sure. If I adjust in my DNA, I mean, it's a finish. You're implying you're a natural athlete is what you say. I'm definitely natural athlete, yeah. Heavy implication. Okay, so for people who don't know the Ebi rules, it's an interesting rule structure where the over time, you put yourself in, like, the worst possible position and the task is to escape, and then the other person gets the same thing. What do you guys think about that rule set? I like it just because, first of all, I don't, I don't like the idea of having to put somebody on my back, but I do like the definitive answer in the match. Like, either you escaped in time or you got, you know, written out. So the. Absolutely, like, you have a. You get to the final winner. That's great. I'd much rather have that than a close decision. And it kind of goes other way. What about you? I mean, honestly, there's all the different rules. When I look at the rule sets, I just try to think of what rule set I could beat that individual in. And I sort of gear myself towards that. That's really the strategy there. I think there's some guys that like that stall a lot that you would love to have Ebi overtime with at the end. You know, they're stalling until they have to give us a good position. But then there's some guys that are so good in those positions, I'm like, oh, maybe we just do a regular match, you know? What are the rules in the streets? The streets? No time limit. Yeah, that's one of it. There's also, like, concrete and cars. Biting. Biting? Yeah. Poking, yeah. So you don't like that rule set. Are there some people you would prefer in the street as a rule set? Me? Probably nothing. I don't know. The ebI. I mean, it's tricky, you know, it depends on the opponent, which rules that I'd want to do. What about you, Nick? What do you think about the rule set of Ebi? Yes, I think Ebi is very good from a spectator point of view. You know, people find it very entertaining to watch you know, because people want to see submissions and you're putting people, you're putting the athletes in a position where, you know, you have like, the highest percentage submission in the sport. So obviously you're going to get a lot of submissions. My issue with it is it is a rule set that allows somebody that's overall worse at Jiu jitsu to win a match. You know, a guy can go out there and just stall and just get completely dominated for the entirety of regulation, and then he gets to start on the guy's back. So that's. That's my one issue with it. But also, I mean, it's interesting to see, like, the best people in the world have to be put in a really bad position and to see how good their escapes are, for example. Yeah, it's interesting. Yeah. But it doesn't feel like a realistic. It's a fun thing to watch, but it doesn't feel like the real fight. Yeah, it feels weird. I'll claim it. If I start an overtime on someone to finish them, I'll claim it. But if they submit me an overtime on my us. You good to know? Yeah, it's good. The issue is people like stalling to just win the overtime. So where you got this guy, this whole training camp is just not get subbed and win the overtime. It's a bit boring. By the way, I have a rose behind you. Somebody gave me a Valentine's flower, so if you missed the one from Gordon, I got one for you. Well, I'd appreciate that. Thank you. It's good to feel loved. All right, so what did you learn from that match? Like, a takeaway is, technically speaking, like, what do you need to work on? Well, I learned that I am pretty good. Yeah, pretty good. I got a, you know, a few. I know exactly what my weakness is. You know, it's the. The leg lock department, and I'm doing. I'm doing a lot to. To, you know, get better in that specific aspect. I can defense attack, I would say. Yeah, attack defense reattacks. Even if I wanted to offensively enter a leg, you know, I could use some work there as well. But I feel like once I solidify, like my, like, if I come in, I'll become a black belt, specifically in the leg lock department. I feel like I'd be unstoppable. If you, Nicky Rod, definitively beat Gordon Ryan, how would you do it? Buggy choke. Buggy choke. Buggy choke for the listener. I don't even know how to describe buggy choke. What's the definitive, like, conclusion on that joke. Does it work? It's a. It's a choke that you do when you're in a. What's the opposite of a dominant? It's not submissive in a non dominant position of bottom of sight control. Yeah. Just an embarrassing submission to get caught with. Really? Yeah. But does it work? It works on certain people for the listener. He glassed over at Nicki. It's embarrassing, but it's also. What? It's a way to frustrate the opponent, for sure. Yeah. It's a new part of the sport. I feel like the Rotola has brought it back into fashion. And even if you don't get it, because it's one of those moves that's so embarrassing, at the first sign of danger, the top guy abandoned ship, and you can basically retain guard by attempting a very embarrassing submission. So the threat of embarrassment. Yeah. People pull out very quick to avoid suffering the consequences. I think some people underestimate how good of a submission it is. I mean, like, once you're locked in there, there's not too many defenses for a buggy joke. Are you. Is there an instructional on the way from you, J Rod? Actually, my little brother has one. Oh, yeah? For real? You actually legit have. Oh, wow. That's awesome. Well, check it out. So, I mean, there is. I mean, you're making a joke out of it, but it is a real, like, there's a system to it. I mean, yeah, I don't know if we call it a system. It's a good move. I mean, you take an opponent that was just winning in a greatly dominant position, and then, boom, in that same position, they're pretty much. They're losing. You know, it's an interesting move. What's the name of the. What's the name of it? It's called the buggy PDF. Okay. The buggy pedia. I thought there'd be something, like, very Craig Jonesy about it. Okay, awesome. I know you don't want to sort of reveal the secrets of what you're working on, but in general, what does it take to beat Gordon? I guess. Okay. It would have to be some kind of a choke, I think. Any joint lock or anything like that, he's just gonna let it break and stay in the match. So I don't even think he'd tap from, like, a renegade choke. I think I would have to put him to sleep. So putting him to sleep is how it went. So Gordon is somebody who really hates losing. Yeah, like, he won't even tap in the. In the practice room. I remember, like, I had a toehold a couple times in practice room, and he was just comfortable, like, working there. I'm like. I'm not really putting much on it. I think he just, you know, maybe because of situations like that in practice, he kind of didn't respect my toehold's ability in competition. You've done that to me in the practice. I have, yeah. Yeah. I'll give you a little. Give me a little pop. And then he let go. That was only 10% right there. Hey, don't get into math. Okay? Is there some part of that you think is necessary to be a champion as to, like, this almost unwillingness and competition to tap? I think there's definitely something to be said for people that are just, like, you know, willing to go that extra mile or to take that damage to secure their. Their victory. Is there part of you that, like, would hate to tap or hates the tap? Yeah, I mean, all of me would hate that. Yeah. The whole part of me. Isn't there a John legend song like that? All of you and all of me. Very romantic. Yeah. Yeah, we're sticking on that theme. Okay. I'm sorry. Oh, one of the things Gordon asked, I forget how he put it, because I think there's a lot of words that would need to be censored involved. But he said, ask them how it feels to have a zero five record against me with four submissions combined. I mean, first of all, I wasn't sure he could count to five. That's an impressive feat. That's an impressive. Oh, and five. I mean, I will say one thing. Nobody beats me four times. I love you so much. Lex. I did have a question. I did have a question for you. There was some controversy on your twitter about a list of books. Yeah. And I was wondering why Gordon's book wasn't featured amongst that literature. Well, it was only the first 30 books, or, like, the first 20 books. And it would, of course, be in. Something interesting about Gordon. He's the first author that's written more books than he's read. Pretty good if you face him and beat him. What's your take on what it takes to be Gordon? You guys kind of joking? You go pretty hard recently on each other. But as a fan of jiu jitsu, I'm all in on this rivalry. It's just fun to watch. I mean, first of all, I don't think I go really hard with him. I think Gordon is. He's pretty sensitive. You know what I mean? He's looking for a large insult in a small insult. And for me, like Australians, we just attack each other all day, every day. And for me, like, if I see someone that takes himself very seriously, that's like blood in the water. That's funny. To me. To me, if I can just gently provoke and get a strong reaction, that's hilarious. Like, Aussies, we will just attack each other. And the first person that gets upset, he kind of loses the exchange. So I think that is very, very entertaining. Like, if you were to beat Gordon, would the mental game off the map be part of it? I think it would be a factor, for sure. But, I mean, I'm never going to come out too crazy direct with him, you know, like, I don't. I find that, like, if you get too upset online and you're going crazy, I find that I'd be embarrassed to do that myself. Obviously, each. Everyone's different. Everyone has a different style, you know? But, like, yeah, I think mental, the mental aspect would play a big factor. I mean, mainly because if I were to beat him, I would send him a message every day until I died. Yeah. Just to gently remind him that I got the last one. The last one is all that matters. We're not giving. We're not giving score. So, like, once you beat him, you're going to run for the rest of your life. I mean, run, but look back. Yeah. With messages into the sunset. Okay. Oh, by the way, you've talked very lightly. You've talked shit very lightly against Alexander Volkanovski's opponent. Very lightly. Have you received death threats or how, how are you still alive? Like Gordon, I would say people from Dagestan take a joke very well. You know what I mean? Really? Do they really? No. Oh, like Gordon. Oh, sorry, I'm slow. I do aggressive mode in my head. Listening to you, Islam is pretty cool. I wanted to stir it up a bit, you know? Cause, like, I felt like that was a massive fight and it probably should have had more attention than it was receiving, so I wanted to just gently stir it up a bit. I feel like sambo guys are in the same vein as catch wrestlers. Very sensitive, you know? Like, obviously, there's only three people in the world that do catch wrestling sambo, maybe ten to 15. So I figured we could really provoke them with that sort of jujitsu sambo stuff. Islam took the jokes very well. The russian fans, not so much, are very serious. There's not many smiles in Russia, you know, they didn't take it as well. I'm trying to suppress the anger. The rage is building up inside me slowly. So you guys mentioned steroids. I like that you bring that up after we talk about Russia. For the record, smooth segue there. I did not condone the statements said by the Aussie, but I would love to travel with you to Russia. That would be a good time. You might get killed with me now. No, I would be the first to turn to backstab. You're like, I got in there. Get in. All right. Are most of the top grapplers on steroids? I mean, it's hard to say. You know, some people look like shit and they're on steroids. Some people look excellent and they're not on steroids. It's so, so hard to tell. That seems to be the general consensus that a lot of people on steroids. I'm always a little bit, I don't know. So I'll be honest. I've never, I've never seen anyone take steroids. I've never taken steroids. I don't even know if that's the right term to use or like TRT, any of that. So I'm very careful, like, to not let my naive fite lead me to take conclusions. But I do feel a little bit weird about the witch hunt nature of it. Some people a little bit too eagerly claim that others are on steroids just because they're successful. Um, but at the same time, it does seem that a lot of athletes will do whatever it takes to be successful. Yeah, I mean, if a sport doesn't test, you got to assume most people are going to do it. And especially now as more money comes into the sport, you got to assume more people are going to do it. You know, I generally like do AGCC and like, does jiu jitsu test. It's actually encouraged. What's encouraged? Okay. You get a pamphlet. Okay. They don't test. There's no test. They test to make sure we're on steroids. Cause obviously it's a big show for the UFC. Fight for us in the future. You don't want anyone coming in out of shape. Very nice. Do you think using steroids in that kind of context and sports is wrong? Like stepping away if it's not illegal? I mean, do you think, ethically speaking. I like to assume everyone's on steroids so I don't have to feel bad about using steroids myself. Yeah. Do you use them? You use all of the steroids? I'm over 30. It's doctor, you know, that's the medical definition. That'S the medical. Okay, I'd like to meet your dog. Therapeutic use, you know? Therapeutic, right. Like, how do you just feel about it? I mean, it is cheating for sure whether they test for it or not. I think it is cheating. Obviously. Some people are gonna say, oh, fuck, everyone's on it. I should be able to get away with it. Makes it even playing field, you know? But it kind of becomes russian roulette. Cause it's like if one guy's taking a small amount and the other guy is taking a huge amount, he's gonna reap huge rewards. In the short term. Probably be dead pretty early, but die a champion, mind you. You know what I mean? So it's like, I don't know where that line is. Yeah. Yeah. What do you think about that? Do you think. Do you think it's worthy to take health risks? I think if you're just for the. Glory, I think if you're 40, about to die, looking at a cabinet of gold medals for wrestling other men, it's probably not going to hit the same way on your deathbed, you know what? Sorry, in which direction? Like, is that a good thing or not? No. You probably gonna feel like, oh, fuck. I probably wasted a bit of health on that, you know? You think so? Isn't that. Isn't that, like, the glory of it? Like you said, other men? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, I mean, like, you know, maybe wrestle a woman as well? What'd you do with. With Gabby on Valentine's Day? What, did you take her? We filmed some new stuff for Onlyfanse. For onlyfans. We never stop working. There's a love affair is also a work affair. Okay. I don't know. I. There's something to that. Me, like. Like Olympic gold medalist accomplishing, like, the heights, sacrificing everything. Just everything. The first 2030 years of your life for this silly little piece of metal. I don't. I think there's something beautiful to that that's, like, inspires a lot. A lot of people. And that's like the height of the human condition in a way. Like, if you survive, I'm just saying, if you're in your deathbed early in. Life, we all die. All men die, but not all men truly live. How many years. How many years are you willing to shave off for a gold medal? That's a good question. How many. How many are you willing to shave off for a gold medal? Well, you're. For silver medal. For a silver. I mean, for a silver medal, I'd shave a few off. I think two silver makes it gold. It's worth five years. Five to ten maybe. Yeah. Shave off the bad years, enhance the good ones, you know? Well, I mean, you've sacrificed, you guys sacrificed a lot, a lot of your life. You continue sacrifice. Oh, you don't, you don't see it as sacrifice? It's fun. I think training's fun. Being adamant about it, consistent gives you, I mean, we, I think we have a great routine, great ritual. Definitely enjoy the process. All right, well, do you guys know this is bro science or I'm talking bro scientists. But do you know how long steroids stay in your system? Forever. Forever. Oh, because it's like, hey, once you. Do it, you own it. Yeah. Just the knowledge. Yeah. All right. I think it's different for each steroid, right? I think some of them last longer than others. It depends if it's a year. And you would think I would do a little research before this asking these questions. Why do you think most athletes and coaches don't talk about steroids? Like, why is it such a, like a secret? Why is it so embarrassing? I think they probably talk about it like, amongst the team and whatnot again, I mean, it's only, it's gonna be more shady if it's like a, your sport is tested or whatnot. We're kind of in the Wild west, in the, in the grappling World, you know? Yeah. But why don't grapplers talk about it? Because it seems cheating. I mean, it's kind of insinuated as a bit of cheating even if it's not like, if it's not tested. I mean, still you're, you're taking a person that can, you know, maybe has good jujitsu, good mechanics, you putting them on the leg and they're subbing you with a heel hook versus breaking your leg with a heel hook. You know, something as subtle as that can make, you know, big differences. All right, this is going to make me sound dumb, but is it possible that steroids are not a huge help in grappling? I think if you're bad at jujitsu and you do steroids, you can gonna continue to be bad at jiu Jitsu. But if you're great at gear, I'm sorry, if you're great at grappling, if you're great at grappling and then you also do gear, it's gonna enhance what you're already, you know, good at and make you much better. But, like, how much is the enhancement? I guess is the question. How much is muscle valued. Like, if you're question, if you're doing. Gear and you're not changing weight that much, like maybe it helps you a little bit, but if, you know, you're, you're gaining 50, 60 pounds of pure muscle and it's like, that's a huge enhancement. That's another human. Does muscle, a small human. Yeah. Does muscle matter in jiu jitsu? I guess is the question, is it possible that it gets in the way? I say muscle matters, but technique matters more. I also think that it'll help you develop technique as well because obviously, you know, testosterone helps with recovery rate. So if you're on gear, you're able to train a lot more. Now with that being said, if you're not able to learn, obviously it's not going to help in that aspect. But if you're somebody that knows how to learn and get good at Jiu Jitsu and then you add gear on top of that, you're able to do significantly more sessions throughout the week. Okay. And by the way, gears, steroids. Steroids, yeah. Okay. I also think that you don't have to be as consistent, uh, in like your sleep and your food and stuff. If you're, if you're on gear, you have a little bit of leeway. Um, but I mean, being consistent and in your diet and your sleep definitely would, would help, you know, the process. Since you use most steroids of any athlete I've ever met. Do you think steroids help jiu jitsu? I think obviously it helps recovery and your ability to train more, but I think some, I've seen some guys go on steroids and then suddenly they feel like the incredible hulk. And now in the training room, they start to rely more on strength than the techniques they had. And it actually, in some respect, hinders them and makes them gas more in competition because then they're using more of the muscle they never used to have. So you've implied that you're a natural athlete. You said that. He said that skeptically. Is this something you do for social media to talk shit to Gordon, to imply that he's not a natural athlete? Well, I only pretty much recently on social media I had this rebuttal, you know, saying that, you know, Gordon's on gear. And I only said that because after, after our match, in our most recent match, the Ebi rules match, he accused me of greasing, which is like lubing up. So I'm slippery during our match, so. And you did not? I did not. I was checked multiple times before and after our grappling event, and he still, you know, went out and accused me of this. So I was like, all right, as opposed to telling a lie, I'll just tell the truth about, you know, your steroid use, which it shouldn't be that big of a deal in retrospect. Cause he kind of admitted it and whatnot previously. So it's. Yeah, I just kind of felt like I had to rebuttal, and I didn't do it immediately. Cause I was like, all right, I know I have this podcast planned, so I'll wait to do it on my friend Mark Bell's podcast, you know, be a little more. Get a little bit more exposure on it. And, yeah, I knew he was going to bite the bait, but I didn't think it was going to, you know, bite the baby that hard. I know he's a little stressed out about the comment, but, you know, and. That was the origin of you guys going back and forth on. Well, it wasn't so much back and forth. It was just. I went forth, and then he kept going back, back. Like, I remember one. One of my guys dm me, and they were like, gordon's made, like, 68 Instagram stories, and 67 of them were all about you. I was like, all right, well, I'm in his head for sure. Got us a few followers. We appreciate. We did get followers. He even shouted out our b team wipeout program. So. Thank you. Yeah. Okay. Speaking of which, what's the B team? How's it run? And why is it called the B team? Well, I mean, Craig, was the a team. Taken. I would have been. For me, b's for best. Okay, best. All right, what does B stand for? For you, what does it represent? What is the ideal? Like, the, you know, Miyamoto Musashi philosophical foundation of B team. Aim low and achieve. If the bar is set low, you can't help but win. Okay? That's Nikki's philosophy with women as well. Set the bar incredibly low. Overachieve. So what. What is the b team? How do you guys run it? Like, what? Yeah, I mean, can you just talk about the school, how you found it? What? What? What is it? What's it like? I mean, pretty much just a regular jujitsu gym. We started as sort of a pros, only purple bone above team. And we have me, Nikki Rod, Nikki Ryan, Ethan, Damian. As coaches. Am I missing someone? Oh, JB, your memory with your old age. Impeccable memory. Yeah. And we got JB coming on to teach white belts, but just your stock standard. Jiu jitsu team, we focus on more. We lean heavily towards the professional athlete side of things. We have a lot of high level guys in there. Class structure, regular instruction, positional sparring, open rounds. But we sort of took a. A heavy slant on marketing side of things. We really try to blow up the YouTube channel, obviously, we sell a lot of clothing, merchandise and stuff, so, yeah, we just sort of took a modern approach to a standard jiu jitsu gym because, I mean, jujitsu gyms are full of some of the most boring human beings on earth. So we try to highlight strong words. Craig jones. Strong words highlight the other side of things. You know, keep it pretty light. Heart. It can be fun. Yeah, that jujitsu can be fun. I guess that it could be cool, too, you know, it's not just full of steroid it up autistic people, you know? Question from Reddit. Quote, need to hear some of the stories about drop ins that led to the making of the gem of a video, the do'S and doN'ts of training a b team. Any. Any fun stories, anyone that stands out. Do you guys remember any police involved ever? We had a guy coming. We had to kick him out. He was stalking two of the members. Yeah, well, I mean, that's just crazy people, you know? Like, I portray a pretty insane image online, and I guess I am that a lot of the time, but at training, try to keep it. While training, around training, I'm insulting everyone, but while training, I try to keep it pretty serious. But obviously, the image I portray lures in some of the crazier members. I mean, like, the thing is about the. The Jimmy guys run is. Is really professional. It's, like, friendly. It's like the light hearted joking is there, obviously, this, you know, like, shit talk and all that kind of stuff. But, like, it's. It's a pretty safe environment. Yes, but the public Persona might attract some. Some maniacs. I won't say which places I've trained at, but obviously, some places, you walk into the room and it's very, very serious. Yeah, there's no smiles around, obviously. It's probably average training room in Russia, but no smiles. Very serious environment, you know what I mean? And I definitely don't like that. I don't want to show up to training and be walking on eggshells, not know what the coaches mood's like that day. I want to go and have a good time. Keep it lighthearted. What was in the video? What are the do's and don'ts? Because, like, the address is public. Like, anyone can show up. Anyone can show up. Yeah. What would the do's and don't? Does anyone challenge you, like, to a fight? Not, yeah, not yet. I mean, probably from other gyms in town. They probably, that's probably coming down the line. But do's and don'ts, I'm all in on that. I would be excited as a fan to just watch. I love the drama. Not the drama. No. Well, a little drama, a little drop of poison is good, but ultimately it's the best grapplers in the world kind of going at it. Yeah. That's fun. Because I, maybe I'm wrong, but I think there is an underlying deep camaraderie at the end of the day, when you're at the top of the world and you're in the same town, what. Could possibly go wrong? It's like a shitty western, but like an epic western where like, Clint Eastwood, like the good, the bad and ugly, of course. I love it. I'm here just eating popcorn like that. Stare in the pot. I'm not staring the pot. I'm not staring the pot. These questions were from Reddit. That one for sure. Yeah. I mean, what could possibly go wrong if you're the world's best grappler hates you and you're gently provoking him behind the scenes every day? Well, I mean, for sure in Texas. And you've stolen his brother, held him for ransom, kidnapped. It is like a story of a shitty western. I think you now allow white belts to train with you. What's it like to open it up to a bigger audience? We haven't opened it up yet, but it'll be interesting to see. I mean, I feel like your higher belts, they really understand what the training room is, you know what I mean? White belts early, they're trying to find their place in the gym. Could be kind of awkward and stuff in that environment. So I think obviously those white belts coming in will change the dynamic, but the white belts will have a separate white belt classes, obviously for them, because given it's such a high level gym, it'd be tough for a beginner to be able to enter the more advanced classes. Obviously we're teaching more advanced techniques. So, yeah, we've separated a wide belt program, I believe. 06:00 p.m. monday to Friday. Yeah, maybe we'll have a Saturday one as well. But it'll be interesting to see how it goes. We're trying to do things different, you know, like trying to do your traditional jiu jitsu gyms. Obviously, you're not going to teach beginners wrestling at all. We're trying to split it at least 33% top game, bottom game, and wrestling. So at least create more well rounded athletes from day one. Whereas I feel like most traditional jiu jitsu gyms might have no, gee, once a week. That'll touch wrestling. Very ibjef heavy techniques. But again, the sports changing for sure. Just to take that on, how does a beginner get good at jujitsu? Like, given that you're starting this web. But what's your philosophy on that? Obviously, buy all of my instructionals at full price. Yeah. Not during a sale. Okay. That would go a long way. For those of you who are Russians. I'll give you, I'll send you instructions or all the forms so you know how to, how to steal it. Yeah, just, I bought them all, so I'll just send it to you for. We do, I mean, we do have the Mackerchief 50 discount code, you know. Yeah. Offering discounts to help him out for the rematch. I got the. Nice, okay, well, I got 100% discount for you if you need it. But that said, you're instructional are both hilarious and brilliant. And it's one of the most respected instructionals out there with incredibly great names. Yeah, it probably loses me sales, honestly, due to removing the seriousness of the. Cause, they think it's gonna kind of suck. It's gonna be some funny, gimmicky thing. Or, I mean, some people don't even know if it's a real product. That's a big hurdle I have to overcome is they see it and they're like, is that a real thing? That's a problem. But how does the white bell get good? I think they just, I mean, just have to show up, just have to put in the effort, try to focus on using techniques and training rather than just fighting to the death, you know? Although that is entertaining for us to watch two white belts fight it to death. Yeah, but what are the techniques you should focus on? Like, what's the process? What does it mean to show up? Like how much drilling, all that kind of stuff. Like what it, what if you were to optimize the first six months of a, of a beginner? There's a lot of people who listen to this and haven't tried. They've been curious. I have a lot of friends who haven't, who are like jujitsu curious. They're constantly looking for an excuse to start. I think it's just gotta be as simple as possible, you know? Like, we shouldn't be teaching more advanced movements. I mean, obviously, in the grand scheme of things, there's highly advanced techniques, and then there's slightly advanced. And I think trying to teach those guys real specific positions, even, like, real specific types of guards, is just beyond them. I think the best way to learn is through problem solving. And I think if you show the technique before they've discovered that problem, the learning is sort of held back. So I like the idea of using kids style games to show them a problem and then use the techniques to fix the problems they've just discovered. I think that's the best way to learn. Can you give an example of a problem to show them before you give them the techniques? Like, what are we talking about? So, say you wanted to teach posture in wrestling, you could create a game where one guy, the game might be get to a leg or get to two legs, control the leg. Like super simple, but the rules, the constraint would be one guy is forced to keep upright posture, and one guy is forced. Well, not forced, but he's allowed to keep a bent at the hips, lower posture, and obviously, within that constraint, the guy with the better posture is going to have more success. He's gonna have a better posture to secure a leg or secure both legs. And therefore, you've demonstrated the flaws of bad posture without having to explain it to him before they really tested that out. Okay. And then the result of that, you would realize that the bent over posture is better. Yeah, you have that aha moment rather than just being. Having it spoken to you. You wrote, craig, I'm a big fan of constraint based learning, I guess, is what you're talking about. I love presenting beginners with a problem before the solution, like here. Attempt to hold side control with no. With no cues on how. Then I see how the guy got out and addressed issue by issue, cross face and hip control and so on. Okay, so what are some other examples? Like side control? Yeah, that would be excellent. One side control, like teacher like, obviously, we say, oh, you secure a crossface so they can't turn into you. Much easier to have them try to hold someone down without explaining what a cross face is, and then use that technique to address the problem they've just encountered. So I think you could do that with a lot of areas of jiu jitsu, like even more advanced, say 50 50. Obviously, a mirrored position where you both have access to each other's heels. Most people will stall out of that position and keep their feet crossed. I think a great constraint for both of them. You can't cross your feet. Now you have to learn how to slip the heel hook when they expose it and how to safely re attack of your own. So the constraint is you can't be too defensive in that position. And I think the rate of learning increases. Why do you think the rate of learning increases? Like, why do you think that works? Because you encounter more problems, say, in that situation, they're going to get you heal a lot more in whatever period of time you allocate the drill for than if the legs are crossed. I don't think the hard part splitting the legs to get to the submission. I think the hard part's practicing control while they're trying to slip it at a later stage. And then obviously trying to slip your heel when you're in more danger also makes you more comfortable in that bad position if you're used to doing it with open legs. Yeah, I think that probably that style of teaching forces people to focus on. This is so easy to fall into. FocusInG on, like, memorizing a particular details of a technique without thinking, like, why the hell does this even work? And if you don't have that, you could get to focus on, like, from, like, as cliche as it sounds from first principles. Like, why the hell, how the hell did I get out of this? Like, why does this even work? Why does wrestling work? Why do you have a bent over posture? You get those, like, start to ask those kinds of questions, which is kind of interesting, because it's not obvious to me that bent over posture is the right posture for jujitsu. Right. I'm confused, actually, about that. I don't know about the correct posture. Yeah. For Jiu Jitsu. Like, what's the right answer? I think bent over posture is still. Good for jiu jitsu, even with the Judo and all that. Like, why are so many jujitsu people, like, at a high level, the posture is higher up? Well, I think the. I think wrestling posture is just a bit too low because it's not necessary. Right. If wrestlers are, like, low enough to the ground where your hands could touch the Mat. But in Jujitsu, you know, it's a, it's kind of a mix between, like, WrEstling and, like, Judo or, or GrEco ROman wresTling. So I think it's just a bit more. More lax then it's, it's bent over, but it's not upright, and it's also not super low. Bit more room for error, too, because obviously the Jujitsu guy shot isn't going to be as athletic or as quick as a wrestler, especially wrestler with shoes. So it actually comes down to the fact that JuJitsu people, just on Average, even at the top level, are not good at shooting. I think so, yeah. I think obviously, I mean, all the wrestlers in american stuff, they're STArting super early, super young, you know what I mean? They've. By the time they get to the same age, we are really in our sport and stuff, they've spent much longer doing the actual sport and the average jujitsu guy. And then there's another level of wrestling, of course, with the soviet bloc, that just was unachievable for your guy. Who you. An australian rugby. Yeah, a former rugby player. Rugby, is that kind of like american football but much less money? Is that what that. Much less money. Much tougher, I would say. But who knew that the cure to the dagestani wrestling were the Aussies? Were the Aussies. Okay, let's go there. Your friend, your training partner, Alexander Volkanovsky, you helped him prepare for the Islam Makachev versus Volkanovsky fight. Who do you think, first of all, won that fight? But that's a tricky one. How is that the tricky question? I will say when. When all the shit talk you've been doing, how is that the tricky question? When I was in the corner going into the fifth, I personally believed live that Volkanovski probably needed a finish to take the victory. But you have to think that way, right? In general or you, like, legitimately, it's. A great area because the judging, who knows? Plus, I was like, wait, we're in Australia. Where's this bias? You know, we've got some australian judges here. I was really hoping we get a bit of bias on that. Unfortunately not. Hopefully they lose their jobs. But again, yeah, it was, it was a close fight. I think sometimes you're blinded in the moment because again, everyone counted Volkanovski out, the crowds behind him, so everything he does going to get a huge cheer. You bias towards the smaller guy, you bias towards the underdog. So you sort of. Whatever the underdog does has a bigger impact in your mind. And sometimes that can bias as the fight goes along. But, yeah, super, super close fire. I would really love them to have a rematch, but obviously that's going to hold up both divisions, so I don't know if they'll be able to do it. Do you think they'll do a rematch soon? I mean, that wasn't. That was an epic fight. I was listening to the fight companion during. They all thought so. They biased strongly. The opinion. Round two is the. The tricky one? Yeah. Round two is the tricky one. Anyway. I'd love to see that, like, run it back and do three, actually. This is an epic fight. What was the brief conversation you had with Islam Makhachev and his team? I didn't know how we take the joke because obviously Khabib tried to flying Eagle kick Dylan Dannis in the face. So I wasn't sure how my humor would go. But, I mean, Dylan must have said some worse things to me. I was just playing around. I mean, you can't really take anything I say serious. Come across like an idiot, but. So when he was coming up to me afterwards, I was like, oh, I don't know why he's gonna say. And again, he. Maybe he would have been more upset if he had lost, but he just received the judge's decision. Yeah, but he came up. I went to check his hand. He gave me a big hug and then pretended to throw me. And then I thought the interaction was over, and then he circled back. So that's why I was so awkward. I was like, he's coming back. He wants to say. He wants to. He wants something else. But he just said, why didn't you teach your boy how to escape the body triangle? Oh, wow. Interesting. What did you say to that? I said, well, I mean, obviously you've got to learn how to finish a rear naked show. Is that what you said? No, I didn't say I was laughing. But then they ushered us out. They were like, get out of here before the Aussie crowd attacks. Yeah. You know, what do you think about. The body triangle position they were in? It seemed like, for the first time, it seems almost like Volk was dominant in that position, which is kind of weird. I mean, damage is meant to trump control MMA judging. Damage is the number one. Do you think the judges saw that? What did they score, that athlete? I think they all scored four towards Islam, three and five. Two of the judges scored towards Volks. One of the judges scored three for Islam, one of the. It was 49 46 for one of them, and the other ones were 48 47. I think, again, the confusing round was round two. I don't think anyone scored the body triangle round for Volks, which I wish they had. Volkanovski was and is still, arguably, pound for pong, greatest fighter in the world. How long have you known him? I don't know. The first time I met him before he was in the UFC when I used to live in Melbourne. He came down to train at Absolut, and then we really connected on Ultimate Fighter. One of his guys he was going to bring to ultimate fighter, Brad Riddell, pulled out last second. So he called me when I was in Puerto Rico, and he's like, do you want to coach on tough for five weeks? And like I said, puerto Rico was apocalypse now. I was like, yeah, get me out of here. So I took, jumped on that opportunity, and we were in Vegas five weeks together. Cause he was meant to fight Ortega, and then he got hit with COVID real bad, got stuck in. I think he was in hospital for maybe one to two weeks. And then before he flew back to Australia, they were like, all right, maybe we just do you guys as the ultimate fighter coaches. So I jumped on board with that, and that's really when we've become close. Obviously, I was useful in the Ortega fight, helped him get out of submissions. He fought then korean zombie Max Holloway. I basically just held the bucket at that point in the corner, a couple striking fights, and then again, yeah, we had to tackle the Islam problem. So I did spend five to six weeks down there preparing for that. How did you tackle the Islam problem? How did I tackle was you, somebody who barely knows anything about wrestling, having. To, obviously doesn't take much, you know, especially russian wrestling. Did the beard help or like what? Like, in all seriousness, what were some of the key ideas that you worked on with Volkanovski to prepare for it? I had the help of Frank Hickman. Hickman was down there, too, one of the Hickman brothers wrestling coach. So we were sort of like problem solving. And I mean, basically we were confident in Volks fence wrestling. His cage work, he's super good on the cage, super like under respected in that position. And we knew that if you were able to take the scrambles to the cage, he would be effective against Islam. Because again, Islam is background in sambo freestyle wrestling. But I mean, honestly, he's probably got the same experience on the cages. Volks, obviously, some of those wrestling skills will translate very well to the cage, but the cage is still somewhat of a gray area and equalizer. And Volks, again, incredible ability to stand up, incredible defense on the cage, which you saw, we worked on strategies to get up, and a ton of submission defense. Islam loves Kimura's, obviously, rear naked from the back armbars. Those are sort of an arm triangles, dominant submissions. But again, the guys he submitted, not grapplers, apart from Charles Oliveira. And again, Charles Oliver was basically knocked out at that point. So it was still impressive he submitted him. But again, I always told people this, they thought it was crazy I was like Charles Olivera versus Islam in a grappling match. Oliveira is going to win that match like submission grappling. Submission, grappling, yeah. So in a pure grappling skill set, I think Oliveira is a more dangerous grappler. So we didn't even come into it thinking Islam was this unstoppable boogeyman that people make him out to be. So we approached her from that, just focused on the techniques, ability to get back up, using turtle to get back up, using turtle to scoot to the cage to get back up. And hand fighting from there, keeping it pretty safe. But what makes volks so special, I think, is his gas tank. Gas tank and his willpower. He's just unbreakable. The Dagestani guys, Khabib Islam, they are good at submissions, but they break guys mentally and they fatigue him. And then they take the submission that's offered. Olivera is a guy that can jump on submissions and have an incredible technical ability to finish those submissions, whether you're fresh or you're tired. And then you combine that with Volkanovski, who incredible willpower, never gets tired. You're never going to break him. And as you saw, he only attempted one submission the whole fight. Is that learned? Is that trained or are you just born with that, that mental toughness? It's a good question. I mean, he's like an anomaly, like the entire fight camp. Not nervous at all, supremely confident the whole fight week, completely confident. He just has an attitude like, oh, everyone cast me out. We'll see. You know what I mean? Islam, he's like, let's see. No doubt. No doubt at all. Super relaxed up until about five minutes before, and then he starts stamping himself up. He's like, you are not taking this belt from my family. He gets into that sort of mindset. He actually says that out loud. You can't teach that survival. He didn't even take a fight, you know? Have you guys ever been like, pushed to the limit like that or broken in a grappling match? I'll do it in practice. Like, I'll push myself to, like, I don't know, I think it might pass out or die or something. Like, as far as, like, how tired you get, you know, because like, in a match, they try not to ever. Get close to that in the match. Yeah, you try to, because, you know, it's important to understand where your exhausted exhaustion point is. But, yeah, if you have to push to that limit a match, you probably do doing something wrong, you know, like, if you like, you see in matches where guys sprint the last, like, minute, they try to win the match the last minute, and it's like, you definitely had some mistakes leading up to that. If you have to, you know, kind of go balls the wall. Okay. But has there been ever times in competition, especially, like, early on, because you're like, you wrestled pretty hard and wrestling is pretty exhausting. Like, not wrestling, but, you know, wrestling style kind of thing, going against the best people in the world? Yeah, I mean, I definitely. Again, I think. I think in practice, it's important to do that hard work that where competition is much easier. You know, I think if you. If you redline in practice and you really push through, like, death's door, then once you're in competition and you're working with, you know, you're being fresh in a comp. I mean, it's. It's much better. Have you ever been to that thing where Dan Gable talks about always wanting to be to a place where you can't get off the mat? Like, you work so hard in the training room, you can't get off the mat? I think he says he's failed at that in his career. He was always able to at least crawl off the mat. Yeah, I definitely never, like, actually died on the map. I felt like. I felt like I was going to die, you know? What about you? Do you quit all the time? I get a lot cramped. I'm like, you know what? You got me, Matt. Let's do this against mine, dude. If I'm asking Craig for a role, he's in the bathroom somewhere. Do you see the value of pushing yourself to that place where you're knocking on death's door? Yeah, but within safety, you know? Cause obviously, the most serious injuries occur when you're tired over training and stuff like that. So I think, like, taking a page out of what those MMA fighters do, especially Volkswagen training. Like, he's not necessarily pushing crazy in each round, but he's doing extra conditioning, assault bike stuff, crazy workouts outside. And he does do some crazy training workouts, but all safe, very safe. Like, when he's redlining like that in the training room, it's a very controlled, safe setting. I think, to do that in jiu jitsu against some of these lunatics out there that are trying to kill you, especially when you have a name, can be dangerous. So your approach to just is, don't warm up and don't try too hard. No, sir. For safety. No, for safety, though. Yeah, yeah. Longevity, you know, and talk shit about Russians. I got it. I got it. I hear you. Oh, you mentioned cage work. What's interesting to you that you've learned over all this time about cage work? What's interesting about the dynamics of that? Are you talking about both? Like the control in the dominant position, but also getting up from the bottom while you're against the cage, all of. That, the added dimension of that cage, that wall being there changes a lot of stuff. Right. So obviously, in some ways, it's a much lower impact wrestling style because you can't be sprawled on. You can shoot. The cage is going to block their feet. You're going to be able to chase down their hips. It's just a completely different fight. And again, because of Islam's judo skills, that upper body controls, you see, he's able to use against the cage, like the inside trips, sort of the uchi mada style hirai go. She throws. So obviously those skills do translate. But, yeah, I think the cage is a great equalizer for a lot of things, like athleticism and stuff. It takes away a huge speed advantage aspect of the fight. So he's really good at standing up. What is there? I assume he learned all that from you and your instructional just stand up. I mean, we were so confident. I was like, you know what? Why don't we put this thing out a month before the fight? Yeah, maybe the illegal download hasn't made its way to Russia yet. Yeah, but it was there for him. Can you, can you explain to me what's in the instructional? Just stand up. Like what, what are the, what are the ideas? What do you, I mean, the old school way to stand up. People talk about the technical get up, you know, the old Gracie put the hand, but I mean, that's, that doesn't work. Hasn't worked for 20 years. You know, if you look at everyone that gets up in MMA, they're using turtle to get up and up. They're using wrestling to get up, you know what I mean? Which is counter to what pure jiu jitsu says. They say don't expose the back. Don't ever expose your back. I think jujitsu is a terrible way to get back to the feet because if you were to retain guard and go half guard or close guard super hard positions to get up, you're basically putting yourself in a leg turk for wrestling. So I think you need to borrow from wrestling to learn how to get up in an MMA fight. So basically how to safely expose your own back while not allowing them to get hooks and use that to get back up. Or at least not allow them to get two hooks. And that applies for MMA, especially for. MMA, especially because obviously striking is a factor. But if they are striking, they don't have locked hands around your body, means you are able to move. You are able to make an attempt to get back up. They have to choose between control, submission, or strike. Post from Reddit. Why does Craig Jones push so hard for a bottom is bad jiu jitsu. What is so bad about playing bottom guard, such as half guard or Delahiva? Those are the two options. No one likes the bottom. Why would I want to get up? It's the question for all of you. Is the bottom a bad place to be? I mean, the bottom's bad if you don't want that guy on top of you. That's the way I look at it. You know, that's, that sounds like something a cowboy would say, but I don't know if there's much meaning. I think the point of Jiu Jitsu is both. Both are dangerous. Being on bottom and on top. I think the longer the match is, probably favors the top guy more just because every movement the bottom guy makes is probably carrying your weight, carrying that gravity on top of you. So I think it's a bit more efficient passing from the top as opposed to sweeping from bottom. Bottoms reactive. Top is active. The top player decides how to engage, how to approach the guard. They can use angles, they can use footwork. They can throw, people throw the legs by. So it's an active position. Bottoms reactive. Reactive. You're going to get fatigued. Yeah, I think, I think it's very difficult to gas somebody out while playing guard, but I think it's very easy to gas somebody out when attempting to pass it. Well, you guys are talking about gassing people out, but is there more dangers from the bottom, like in terms of submissions and all that kind of stuff or. No, I'm back and forth because I'm a top. I'm a top player, but I understand the value of, of being on bottom. Like when I do play guard bottom, I feel like the submission, the submissions come much easier. And when I'm on top, they come also pretty easy. But maybe I just take a different route. Top on the streets, but I'm in the shades. What was the hardest part of the training for the training camp for Volkanovski? Like, you're just experiencing world class MMA fighters training and giving your approach of to jiu jitsu of not trying too hard and no matter what. Yeah. I mean, from my perspective, there's a lot of pressure for that, you know, like that's a, that's, that's a lot of pressure for me to go in and think that I could possibly figure out a way to help this Guy address this guy that's basically never been beaten. I think he got knocked out once, but basically not really even been put in bad positions, you know what I mean? That's a lot of pressure on me, especially Volkanovski is such a great guy. Jiu jitsu is different, you know, like, you coach a guy, he loses, he has time to tap, but in MMA could get severely hurt. There's a lot more weight in what you need to do as a coach. You have a greater sense of responsibility to their health and wellbeing, you know, like, obviously, I know Fox kids, I know his wife. You know what I mean? They're putting faith in you to not just win the fight, but keep this man safe, you know? So from my perspective, a hell of a lot more pressure coaching him as an MMA fighter. So almost like the psychological aspect of, like, of doing the best you can for him. Exactly. Yep, yep. What was hardest about the actual training? Was it the technical aspect of trying to figure out the puzzle of Islam, or was it like being a good training partner, like in figuring out how the grappling would work, basically playing your best impression of Makachev, were you trying to actually impersonate him, like, not just visually, but like in style? Yeah, definitely, definitely. Visually, you're not as good looking, but go ahead, a little taller. But in terms of the training, yeah, I mean, Islam is known as incredibly strong guys. Obviously, I'm heavier than Islam, so theoretically I should be able to replicate that strength difference. And then in terms of grappling, targeting those submissions that Islam does, like focusing on those in the training room, focusing on the way he holds half guard and really in the grappling sense, trying to replicate him on the ground. And then, yeah, I wrestled with him on the wall a ton, trying to replicate, obviously, to the best of my ability, a lot of the stuff he does on the wall, body lock heavy inside trip Uchi martyrs and just constantly putting the work on volks, you know what I mean? Like constantly chaining attacks against him, really. Replicate as he's trying to get up and escape and all that kind of stuff. So this submission, like both judo and submissions, just attack and attack. Exactly. There's only so much you can do, really, because obviously he's been, I think he's, he's been fighting a long time. So it's like you're trying to polish what he already is good at. You can't just completely create entirely new game for him in the space of six weeks. So you're trying to take what he's already effective at, add to it. And luckily, a lot of the stuff he's already very good at was easy to add to for the for the. Fight question from Reddit. I'm very curious why other MMA fighters don't employ high profile grapplers from b team and new wave to improve their grappling. That's from this sub. By now, it's clear that they are levels above almost everyone in MMA, simply because fighters there don't specialize in grappling. But it doesn't seem like fighters, even champions, get training partners from the most successful teams. Why is that the case? From your experience, why doesn't Khabib call you? You might now put in a good word for me. Oh, I will. That's right. He takes a joke pretty well. Yeah, no, you'll be walking with open arms. I think your average Jiu jitsu coach MMA fighters have bad experience with Jiu Jitsu. Guys, Jiu jitsu doesn't have a massive place in MMA, obviously, rounds, stand ups, it's hard, hard to submit people. Your average brazilian jiu jitsu black belt, doesn't know anything about holding a guy down, doesn't know anything about how to stand up. So I think if you over overly utilize that jujitsu guy that hasn't had experience in more modern, no gee, or training MMA fighters previously, it's going to be a complete waste of time to them. I think they're smart enough to realize that. Do you have, and do you guys, do you have interest in MMA at all? Just not even like, well, certainly just competing yourself, but like, just understanding the puzzle of MMA. Yeah, I mean, I've been a fan of mixed martial arts, you know, for a very long time before I, I trained jits personally. Personally, I'd much rather coach than fight, but I mean, I'd fight somebody for, you know, a good check and I get to pick the opponent and have a proper camp. Okay. I could think of a good at. Who's that? All right, who do you think is the greatest MMA fighter of all time? Craig can start with you. Just as a fan of the sport, as somebody who's been deep in it. I mean, from my perspective, after that performance, I'm going to say Volkanovski, because he was able to decisively out strike Max Holloway, one of the greatest strikers in the sport, and he was able to hang with the wrestler of Islam, Akashev. And in terms of. Ortega was able to survive. Ortega, who has some of the most dangerous submissions in jiu jitsu. So I think in my opinion, technically he's the best. So even though. Even though he technically lost, he still, he still has a crown. I believe given the size difference, given he's moving up in weight, I think. All those factors really, the underdog, everything, the pressure. Did you think he would be able to hang in any of the wrestling exchanges with his and. No, no, no. I was really surprised. That's why in my eyes, like, it's kind of funny, like winning. At the end of the day, I feel like judges influenced that. Although I did think australian judges would rob the other way, but I was assuming they kind of somebody paid somebody and not enough maybe. But in general, I just thought he won sort of in the eyes of what martial arts stands for, like sort of going to the fire and survive and thrive and finish the last round strong, which is kind of like, spiritually is what a victory is. So I wish we kept going, like, one more round. Yeah, exactly, that kind of thing. What about you? What do you think? Like, who are the fighters you admire? Like, who do you think is the greatest of all time? I think the fighter I paid most attention to was Jon Jones. You know, he has a great ability just to mix the high level striking, high level grappling, although his, you know, jiu jitsu by itself isn't, you know, probably isn't like, you know, super high level, but his ability to mix everything together, I would say he's, he's the best and he's a fellow, you know, heavier guy, heavyweight now. So it's, it's nice to see, you know, how those guys move at that. Weight and a fellow natural athlete. See what I did there? All right, what about you, Nikki? Yeah, if I had to pick, pick a goat, I would probably have to say Khabib, just because he was undefeated and he had a very high finishing rate. Very few of his fights actually went to a decision. So overall, he dominated almost every single opponent he went against. The dominance, we've been joking about it, but, Craig, what do you think makes the dagestani fighter so good? From this small region of the world, so much dominance has come. I mean, obviously the amount of freestyle wrestling champions from that region probably puts their wrestling above and beyond the best in all of MMA. And obviously a lot of, even in the Olympics, a lot of champions out of there. Right. So I think that skillset combines with them, adding effective pin controls on the ground and jiu jitsu submissions. But again, I think it's that hard training those guys like Khabib would maintain that pressure throughout the entire fight and break guys down. Their ability to fatigue guys to a breaking point, I think, is something they do best. I wonder what, what that is, is that technique, what is that? What is it about their upbringing? Because it's that just that part of the world over. The Satyr brothers with, on the freestyle wrestling side, to all the mixed martial arts people like, it must be part of the, the culture also. They must be doing something. I don't think, I've never, I haven't seen a convincing explanation of why yet of what's specific about their training, what's specific about their culture that creates that. Okay, what do you think about like the flip side? Do you admire somebody like Conor McGregor who knows how to create a spectacle? You, Craig, who likes spectacles? Spectacles, yeah, I mean, I really admire I early Conor McGregor. Cause I found him absolutely hilarious. You know, like, I felt like that was peak banter. I feel like he just took the american world by storm. Aussies, British, Irish, Kiwis. I believe we have a way better level of banter and attacking each other. And it's almost too easy to pick on Americans that take themselves very seriously. I mean, I could believe in other parts of the world, too, the far east of Europe, you know, but that's. The, that's the tricky thing with Conor. I, he was, I feel like you could have gotten in the same kind of trouble because the Russians really took everything very seriously. They weren't joking around. Yeah, that's, that's the problem. It's like, it's, it's, it's a bit of. I mean, some things he definitely takes too far, you know, but I felt like early on, he had the right balance where he wouldn't really cross the line, but he would do, he would do enough. He just took it to another level, obviously, later in his career, but I think early on, a bit of innocent banter. He gets a lot of eyes on the sport, though. He's probably by far the most popular combat athlete of all time because of that. Yeah, I feel like you have to cross the line. I don't think enough people appreciate the values he's brought by crossing the line. He's making a sacrifice crossing the line that's going to affect him for the rest of his life. You know, I see. I don't think so I think you can always walk back because I think unlike people might disagree with this. I, well, yeah, I thought he always radiated a respect for the opponent, like afterwards, and underneath it, it felt like the same way you do it. When I hear you shit talking, I don't see a person who really means it. I see a person who's having fun with it. I always saw Conor McGregor the same way. I don't know, but people took it, like, extremely seriously. But I saw the respect, like the common respect the martial artists have for each other that felt like it was. If you don't like that individual, you're gonna perceive what they say more negatively than if you obviously were. So I feel like if you like someone, you're gonna never think they really cross the line. That's true. So you're saying I like you? That's my perceiving you're bullshit. In a positive light. Are there people that hate you? You get, I mean, some of the family members are just table. As far as students, people that really get to know you all, I hate you. The fans love me, the friends hate me. It's a good place to be. Keep your enemies close. All right. What do you think is the most important muscle for just as a biceps? Oh, I think a strong thing, a strong back. I think back one core second and then biceps. Okay. Biceps. Cool. Do you legitimately think, like, weightlifting helps jiu jitsu? It's kind of, the discussion on the steroids is like the muscle mass and strength and power and explosiveness, all that. I think sometimes when we're at that upper echelon of competition, there's only, there's like, little minute battles that you have to win. And if you're, if you're relatively close in technique, then a lot of times a stronger opponent pulls it out. But it could be also just a limitation. Right. You hold position too long. What about for hobbyists? Do you recommend weightlifting? Like, when you see people in the gym? I always recommend weightlifting. I almost see muscle as the body's armor. Right. The, the more armor you have, the more damage you could kind of take and, you know, maybe recovery is a little bit better. Um, and I've always seen weightlifting as it means to, uh, stick to my routine. Like, if there's no point in lifting if you're not eating right and you're not sleeping right. So if you kind of put it all together, then it's, it's beneficial. What about you guys? You go, do you go to the gym? I go to the gym, yeah. Leave it on an elliptical and that butt machine or. Yeah, I focus on the glutes heavily. All right, what about, like, what about injury prevention and so on? How do you train to minimize the risk of injury? You guys have all been pretty beat up. You've gotten a major injury with the ACL. Yeah. So how do you train to minimize injury? Probably not the right guy to ask. Can you talk through your injury? Like, what happened to. Yeah. So about one week prior to this last ADCC, I was wrestling with this guy named Kenta who was also competing, and I went to go lift him from, like, a rear body lock, and he hooked the outside of my leg, and we just felt something pop. You know, he felt a shift with his. With his leg. And when it first happened, it hurt for, like, the first 30 seconds. And then I honestly debated. I was like, maybe it was just, you know, some freak thing. I was like, I literally thought about continuing the session. Uh, then the next day, I woke up, and it was, like, super sore. I was, you know, limping around, couldn't. Couldn't do a full squat. Um, so it pretty much killed all of my training for the entire week leading up to the event. So I couldn't train or anything. Messed up the cut. Obviously, there's. There's added nerves with that, too, you know, when you're not in the gym every day. Leading up to the competition, I went out there. I wasn't really able to pull guard because I couldn't get, you know, full heal to butt connection, which is inevitable with playing guard. And I was very hesitant to shoot as well. So I came out with the idea of just trying to use hand fighting to tire my first opponent out, and then mainly look to get to under hooks or over hooks and do mostly upper body wrestling. In the beginning of the match, you know, successfully got to an underhook. I got to rear body lock. He tried to roll, and I ended up in top position and side control, but it was during the no points period, and then as the match went on, I gassed out, and eventually he ended up taking me down and then scoring with two hooks on the back. So what's the injury? Yeah, so I got an MRI, actually, after the event. You waited? Wait, wait. You waited until after the event? Yeah, I waited until after. Knowledge or ignorance is bliss. Yeah, exactly. I was like, I honestly, I don't even want to know what's wrong. I was like, I just go out there, compete, you know, I knew it was, like, the. The biggest event to date, and I really wanted to do it. Think about not doing it. It definitely was a thought in my head, especially that, that the day after, you know, it's always the worst day. Whenever you have, like, a serious injury is the day after. And I was like, mandy, I really can't do a full squat. I was like, I don't even know how I'm going to be able to do this. It got a bit better over as the week went on, but I was like, man, I have to go out there and compete. It'll always be in the back of my mind. What if I ended up pulling out? What did you think about this whole. I thought he was just being a pussy. Yeah, just slap him around. Just yell at him. I didn't think we pressured you. We just saw you make your own decision. Right. We're just like, is that tricky thing to do, like, with a heavily, like, like a serious injury like this? We didn't know that was the thing. We didn't know. Honestly, initially, I thought it was I tore my lateral meniscus, but that ended up not being the case. It ended up being a full ACL tear. I was actually super surprised when I got the MRI results. So, yeah, we didn't know how bad it actually was. What do you think about that situation? I think Nikki's a tough kid. And, I mean, when you're so close to that competition, you know, there's not many, you don't get a. Get many opportunities like that to compete in front of, you know, 15,000 people. It's like, you know, props to you for pushing through it and getting it. And, man, he had a close match with one of the best grapplers in his weight classes. Like, you know, a few adjustments here and there and especially, you know, if he was able to train pre previously leading up to that match, I think he pulls it out. So some of the things you mentioned is nerves. There's extra nerves just because of you. Under prepared. Yeah, I mean, you know, feeling under prepared, you want to go into a competition with, you know, the confidence. I did everything that I could leading up to this vent. I trained as much as I could. And then when an injury prevents that, you start to doubt yourself more. How do you guys think about injury? How do you train, you know, training with the best in the world, training to be the best in the world and avoiding injury has. You've gotten. You tore your bicep? Yeah, yeah, I tore bicep curls or, dude, honestly, I. I was, I was a body, I was bodybuilding, you know, for like seven years. And no lie, I did. I trained biceps, like, most days. Like, almost that. Almost every day in those seven years, pretty much, I injured my. I injured myself. That's so jersey man. Anything else or just the biceps? Just. I mean, yeah, I injured the bicep pretty much. I. The day before a wrestling practice, I had, like, a killer arm day. And by arm day, I just mean training biceps very rigorously, getting a sick punch pump. And, uh, I go to wrestling practice the next day, you know, pretty late. I should have been there. I didn't get a proper warmup in, and the first thing I do is I shake hands and I go to shoot a single leg, and boom, I just blew my arm out. The. The first movement I did. So just not being warmed up properly, in addition to, you know, having a very vigorous arm day a few hours prior year. You hear that about warm up? So, like, what, what are some lessons about avoiding injury and training? It, I would say, number one is. Is warming up properly. Make sure. Making sure your. Your body is hot before you do hot stuff. Okay. And what does warm up look like for you? Is it jujitsu or non jiu jitsu stuff? Yeah, just for a warm up in general, I'll do. I'll do something like a. If I'm talking competition, something like a jog, walk back and forth a few times, then a sprint jog a few times to get that heart rate, you know, up and down. And then I'll grab a partner. Actually just filmed a dvd or instructional, specifically on the pre match ritual. In addition to that, I'll, you know, grab a partner. I'll drill some movements. Typically, I'll drill some bad things. Like, I'll start from bottom, bottom mount, bottom slide, control, work out from there. And in pretty much like 20 minutes in, I'm. I'm hot and I'm ready to go for, you know, rounds. Well, what about you, Greg? So what. What's. What's the way to avoid injury? What's the worst injury you've had? What's the worst injury? I don't even know. I'm pretty good, pretty healthy. Whenever you. Whenever you quit and practice, I'm like, that's a mental. Has your heart ever been broken? Many times. Many times. But there's a thing I notice people that spend the most time warming up, often the most injured. It's a strong correlation. You can't argue with science. I remember. You're right. Training with Oliver Taz. Oliver Tazza would have a 60 minutes warm up. Yeah. Surprise, surprise. Always injured. Yeah, very common. Yeah, I find that very common. The training room? No, I think people. It's how they train. Like, if you, like me, first sign of discomfort, backpedal, you know, push through that stuff. Go too hard. Go when you're too tired. You know what I mean? Get too emotional in the role. I feel like those are the times that I've been hurt where I just like, oh, I can't let this guy get me when I have that attitude and train. I believe it's how you train and sort of. So what does this come from? Like, positionally too? Like. Cause you're training against some killers. I mean, you train, you train. You're training with him and going probably pretty hard. Craig gets a little tired. He's like, yeah, I'm good for today. We go once a month with Nikki. Right? That's it. And then you quit, like, 30 seconds in, just. Yeah, you know, you gotta be safe. I like it. What. What about you? What have you learned from the ACL, Tara? Rehab. Yeah. Yeah, rehab definitely would help. Oh, so you haven't been, like, I didn't get surgery. I didn't do essentially any rehab. I just have no acl in my left leg. So what's it like having no surgeon. Goes, you've got two options. Surgery, rehab. Only Nikki goes, I'll do nothing. Definitely should pick up on the rehab. What's it. What's rehab for? That look, like, like, twice a day doing some weird, clueless, like, bands or something. It's good. He's learned from his. He's learned some valuable lessons from. About taking care of his body. Yeah. What's it like just training with no ACL? So at the beginning, it was definitely a little iffy. I would have an occasional buckle. Like, I'd just be wrestling with somebody and go to step back and it buckle backwards a bit. But honestly now, like, I haven't had a single buckle instance in a while. It feels 100% normal when I train. It feels better than my other knee, to be honest. I had my meniscus taken out in my right leg, and that one gets sore more often than the. The no ACL leg. Okay. All right. So putting that aside, is there. Is there wisdom you've learned from that experience? Yeah, definitely should be doing rehab and. And prehab, you know, I think that, you know, especially if you're a hobbyist or a professional athlete, you should be lifting, you know, whether you're rehabbing an injury or just for injury prevention. So I'm actually closer to correct because I've trained my whole life, like, pretty hard, obviously just a hobbyist, but like, twice a day did judo, wrestling, all that. Never broke anything, never injured. Kind of like similar philosophy, except, like, last year, I guess, a year and a half ago, I got a tiny, like, groin pull injury and it still hasn't healed. And I've been using your approach of not giving a shit. Yeah. And like, I surely this is gonna heal. It'll be fine, but it hasn't. Of course, if I was, like, an actual athlete, I would, like, probably still train through it, just fuck it, figure it out. But when you have other stuff going on, you just kind of wait it out. Yeah, but no, I think probably we have. Especially as you get older, you have to do that kind of stuff. I think it's important for people to determine whether what they're going through is an injury or they're just hurt a little bit. Because injury, you know, for sure take time, rehab it, and get better. But a lot of people, like, they'll stubble toe or something. Like, you're out for a few weeks, you know, so. Well, that's, that's the problem with the injury I have. It feels like a stubbed toe. So I was like, I'll just wait a couple days, it'll be fine. And then a couple days later, it's not fine, and you wait, and then I never got an MRI. Never got any of that. It's like, I'm sure I'll be fine. Yeah. So it's hard to know sometimes. Like what? It's hard to know. I feel like a lot of people will just not check it out, be fine. Well, because there's several failure cases. There is a failure case of where everything is a stub toe. You're like, fuck it. Like, like, you're bleeding everywhere. Yeah, that's fine, whatever. So you have to be careful. A lot. A lot of. A lot of people can fall into that too. I think I'm in that category. Go to the doctor. Why do you go to the doctor? Yeah. Your best approach is typically wait until something else gets hurt so that you'll forget about the grind. That's. Yeah, exactly. That's. I was hoping. I was hoping to get hurt. So. Waiting for the. For the broken heart, maybe. Okay, that was very helpful. Oh, you mentioned you're doing a whole thing on the pre match ritual. Can you kind of preview, like, what kind of, what's involved in your pre match ritual? It's a pretty big in the wrestling culture and the fighting culture. Like, kind of what, what to do before your competition. But I think a few of our, a few people are just kind of missing out. Exactly. You know, what to do. So I break it down for them. I break it down to people, like four weeks in advance, how you should prep, you know, your training and your nutrition and your sleep for competition. In addition to that, I break it down even, like, to a smaller scale with a, like what, how early you should get to the event, when you should be visualizing, you know, your competition, what to do, like, you know, 30 minutes before, 20 minutes, ten minutes, five minutes, and the kind of mentality you should have throughout those, those times before you actually step onto the map. When are you visualizing, like, how much are you visualizing the actual, when you say competition, you're talking about the tournament or the actual people you might be competing against? A little bit of both. I'll spend time just visualizing the crowd. Like, if it's going to be, you know, an arena with 15,000 people, I'll spend time in practice and whatnot, like putting myself inside that arena and visualizing, you know, stepping on the mat and hearing the, hearing the crowd scream and whatnot. That way, you know, when competition time comes, it's kind of the same deal. I'm accustomed to it. In addition, when I get to the arena, I'll step on the mat, I'll kind of look at everything. I'll expose my senses to, to what it's going to be, and then I'll kind of shut everything off. Like a lot. Some people, you know, scroll through their phone and can treat it like normal, have this normal conversations. For me, I like to limit my sensory input, my sensory intake before I go out and compete. I just feel like sometimes. I feel like sometimes we only have so many decisions you can make in a day, and I want all of my best decisions to be made when it matters, when it counts. What about you? What's do you have limit your sensory. Input on game day? Honestly, no. Routine, nothing. Eh, I don't know. Yeah, I don't do anything. I'm just like, guys, a double silver. We're both. Instructional. I help you. I'll get another silver now. Honestly, nothing. Hey, I just try to relax, treat it like it's before training. Have a visualizations or. No, no visualization. So the opposite of visualization, you just avoid it? Yeah, yeah. I don't even think about it. I'm just like, yeah, we'll have a good time, you know, try to appreciate it that I can do it. By the way, when you visualize, are you visualizing tough positions or you visualize winning? Mostly. Definitely visualize winning. I'll visualize how I can get, how I'm going to get to my most dominant positions because, you know, in comp, I want to do what I'm best at and I'm also see, I see my opponent in his best positions and how I'm going to escape those if necessary. But most of the time, I'm just visualizing exactly what I'm going to do in that match and I go out there and do it. Okay, so what, when your teammate Craig is, you know, another, like, world class athlete has a fundamentally different philosophy than you do, you visualize being frustrated at him? Not frustrated, but I'll definitely come into practice with, like, solutions to problems that Craig gives me. You know, like if Craig's Craig's, you know, catching me something or give me issues, like, you know, I'll go home, I'll, I'll watch a match that he lost for some motivation and I'll come back and off, I'll put it on. Just dm him like a highlight reel of him losing. Yup. What about you? Like, does it affect you that you're a bit of an outlier? Usually before I compete, right before I go out there, I go, why am I doing this? Do I still need to do this? And I think, hopefully don't embarrass myself, affects my instructional sales. That's the last thought. But I don't even put too much thought into the whole competing thing. I'm just like, you know what? Train hard, hopefully have a good time out. What about the motivation aspect? Like that, that voice that says, like, why am I doing this? That voice can break a lot of people. Like, in the weight cut, it can break a lot of people. Like, why am I doing this stupid, silly sport? Like you said, a bunch of dudes just rolling around, like, what's the point? I'll call someone with a nine to five job and I'll be like, yeah, that's why I'm doing this. Avoid that. So those Dvd's, man. Yeah, I didn't get too deep on competing people. Yeah, we're so polar opposite. It's like almost uncomfortable to be around you. Obviously one of us is a clean athlete. You should do a DvD on that. What about you in terms of preparing for competition, Mickey? The day before, the day of, are there rituals that you follow? Honestly, the few days leading up to it, it's different for me every time. Like sometimes I'll warm up before that, I compete. Sometimes I won't. Sometimes I'll fast, sometimes I'll eat. So it literally is just completely random. I don't follow any specific thing, but in the training room leading up to the competition, I'll definitely, you know, like, Nikki Rod, visualize that I'm walking out onto the competition mats. You know, I'll pick somebody that's a similar body type to the person that I'm competing against. And then we'll start out with some distance between us. We'll come out smack hands and, you know, act like everything's a real competition. I'll even sometimes have, you know, corners that will yell out times and things like that just to replicate it as much as possible. That's funny, because I've talked to a lot of Olympic gold medalists. I used to do a podcast with, like, athletes, and they all sound like Nikki Rod. The two of you are outliers. I don't know. Sometimes I'll do this sometimes anyway. But that's also jujitsu culture. I think maybe the chaos of not taking things too serious is actually really, really helpful. Sometimes the pressure of taking everything way too seriously can break you. I mean, I just don't think it's that big a sport, really. You know, I think if I compete every day in practice, it just makes competition much easier. So I just put the pressure on there. On the competition? Yeah, yeah, on the. SorrY. On the training, on the competing and the training. I don't know. Olympic sports aren't that big either financially, and people take it extremely, extremely seriously. Like, you don't really get that much money from Judas. I mean, I just don't take jiu jitsu that seriously. Cause, like, I was just partying, having a good time until 21, and then I was like, oh, fuck, do I get a job or do I pursue professional sports? And I feel like if I can made a career in jiu jitsu with a decision at that point, and now. You just stumbled your way somehow into, like, being at the top of the world. Yeah, that's what I feel like. I just walked into it. I feel like I couldn't just do that in wrestling, boxing. I couldn't do that in other sports. What was the toughest match you ever had that pushed you mentally? Physically? Technically, this doesn't have to be the best person you face, but was there, like, a moment in your career that was, like, really defining for you? I mean, I would say, like, the toughest mentally was just this. This last ADCC, you know, I just had a big injury leading into it that kind of screwed the whole camp and weight cutting everything up. So, yeah, I would say. I would say the last ADCC. Are you proud of your performance there? Like, you stepped on the mat that you. You pushed through all of it. It. Like I said, I'm a very competitive person, and I hate losing, so. Definitely not. Yeah. You had to collapse long. Actually. He was so physically exhausted afterwards, couldn't breathe. We had to get medical intervention. He thought he had a collapse lung. So he was the most attired that I've ever been in my life in that match. I actually popped the blood vessel in my eye. I was trying so hard. He comes out, he walks off of the ADCC. Matt backstage, and I'm like, I'm kind of getting warmed up for my match. And Nikki Ryan comes. He walks over huffing and puffing. His mom's right next to me, looks at her. He was like, I think I need help. I think I was a lung collapse. Not true. My mom's the one that called for medical. Okay. I was just laying on the warm up mat, fucking dying. Well, we'll have your fine two working long. Laid it all on the line. What about you, Craig? Defining or toughest matches? I mean, they're all pretty tough, you know? I don't know. I can't really pinpoint one. I mean, probably the most annoying one was obviously the one where I had Gordon Amber. I was like, tap, bro. And he wouldn't tap, so I let him out. Mentally, I was like, I shouldn't have done that. Do you ever thing in your brain where it says, should I shit talk now or not? And you ever you say, no, I'm gonna be respectful. I just be serious. Yeah. About some of these. I don't know. It's just silly. It's just all of it, the whole thing. What about you, Nicky, man? Dude, honestly, most of my toughest matches are in the training room, right? Cause I started with these guys. I started training under them, like, you know, started training at dds when I didn't have. Have any knowledge, like, of, like, I knew wrestling. I knew, like, a knee cut in jiu jitsu, but, like, I started training with them when I knew almost no jujitsu. And then I had to, like, you know, really work my way up. So definitely in the training room, like, being, like, having one of these guys on my back or, like, there's a stretch of, like, a few weeks or months when Covid first hit and there was just, like, four of the best grapplers in the world. And we just did drilling in live rounds with these four guys. And it was just. It was. It was hard. It was very hard. You know, every. Every round, doing six rounds, seven days a week with the best grapplers in the world. And it's like you get no break and you're forced to learn on the go. So I think in that, for me in the training room, that was definitely my. My toughest matches, and that's where I built, you know, those mental calluses. There was a period where I drew with Nikki ride probably, what, nine months, twelve months. And typically speaking, like I said, no warm ups. The first round, we usually take it pretty easy. First round, you started mount the whole room. The rest of the training room, they take Mount very lightly. Me and Nicky Rod would be fighting to the death every day. I felt like we did an extra round every day. It was very grueling. I'm very. I'm very mean when I'm in the midst of drilling or lie or live, like we would do. We would drill wrestling, you know, quite a bit. Like stand up and in the drilling, like, I just wouldn't let Craig take me down. Like, we're not going live. We're just drilling. But I just wouldn't let him put me on the floor. So things like that, you know. I know it escalate. Yeah. So you mentioned mount, like, so you do positional training. So is that. Would that be the hardest versus, like, live training? Open, like, starting from guard, I would. Say mount and turtle definitely, definitely made me very tough because you spent all this effort getting off of bottom out, and then you got to get on top of a guy in the. At the time, I'm not that good at holding guys down, escape quick, and I'm like, fuck, I just tried to hold him down. Got to go back down. Same thing with a turtle. It's like you. You start bottom turtle, you're trying to explode. Get out, get away. And then, you know, you switch and this guy get up, gets up pretty quick, and you're like, damn, I got to go right back down. Was that constant circle, man, it's very tough, but definitely, you know, build some character on the mat. What do you think is the value of positional training in general? In Jiu Jitsu, actually, this one, just interacting with you guys, it's not commonly done and just like regular jujitsu gyms would you see? Because probably it's not commonly done because it's so. Most of the experience is just frustrating. Like, if you're evenly matched. You're basically frustrated the whole time. If you, if you're doing it right. There'S a psychological battle that happens in like, the mountain turtle rounds. It's like, you know, because you, maybe you get close to subbing a guy and, or maybe you do sub him. You know, when you start and turtle and you're on their back, you finish them and then you get this high point and then immediately you got to go back down to defensive posture. Yeah, it's very, like, it's emotionally, like up and down. So it's hard to deal with. Super important if you're one of the better people in the gym because it just puts you in positions you don't find yourself in in regular training. So I think like a lot of, uh, if you're a big fish in a small pond and you don't do positional sparring, you're probably going to get exposed in competition. You might even look silly in those positions. So you really have to force yourself to do it, it despite the fact that you're giving someone worse than you a position where they might catch you. So you have to sort of put the ego aside. Yeah, that's one of the things. When I was training regularly, of course, training with you guys, it's like trivial, but I didn't work on putting myself in bad positions. When you get better and you regret it because the big negative thing consequence it has on competition is you don't take as many risks because you're kind of afraid of for your back to get taken, all that kind of stuff. That was me before I went to dds. I remember I showed up there in that old position. I was like, fuck this. You better earn this position. I didn't really have escapes. That was a learning curve for me, for sure. Do you see the value in positional training or is it just the source of tremendous frustration? Yeah, I definitely think it plays a big part in your confidence when you step out onto the, the competition mats, you know, being confident that even if you get put in the worst possible situations, you know what to do and know how to work out of them. I had a long argument with Hodgep when he visited, and he thinks Mount is the most dominant position, even Nogi versus Beck. Is there a case to be made for that or no, do you think? I think all of your opponents utensils, their tools are in front of them. So, like, if you're on Mount, they still have, you know, there's a few ways to get out Mount. I think if you're on somebody's back. I'd personally much rather be on somebody's. Back than flattened out. I'd rather have someone's back and then flattened out. Boots in. Flattened out? Yeah, boots in flat. So not. Not even body triangle, but just flattened. Just completely flat. Almost like the position in May where you see guys get finished because they can't get out. I think that position is probably the hardest position to escape. Can you see what Hodges talking about with Mount, or is he just that good at mount that he says that. You might mean the gee cross collar, you know? I don't know. Or did he mean. He says controlling wise, he just believes that you can complete that there's. He actually thinks there's more ways to get out from the back than there is from the mount prior to getting up, including, like, physically prior to the kipping escape. I would probably agree with him, but that kipping escape's so difficult to manage. It's the funny looking escape where your legs are wiggling. PeoPle have a lot of trouble. It's like, super hard to learn how to do, but then once you learn how to do it, the effectiveness is just huge. Yeah, it's a WEird one when that come to be a thing. Is that pretty recent? I mean, I saw Dds guys using it first, I think. Yeah. Who's the first guy to discover something like that? This seems like a RiDiculous thing to discover. Yeah. What if I just wiggle? I thought it was a joke at first. I was. You guys really doing this? I remember somebody showing me, like, a technique where, like, if you just, like, walk your hand on a mat or something like that. Maybe arm triangle or something. Yeah, walk the army. And it's just like a funny discovery, like, as opposed to, like, trying to, like, shove it in, just like, walk it. I like doing that to people, but with things that aren't true. You know what I mean? I'll just tell them this is a technique and watch him try to work out if I'm being serious or nothing. Yeah, that's what you do when you achieve guru status. They'll just listen to you like you're Steven Seagal. See what they'll believe. Speaking of which, how do you balance. You have to travel all across the world. How do you balance that with running a school, with being a world class jujitsu athlete? I mean, the secrets of travel for me are two drugs, Xanax and Modafinil. That's how we time adjust and we hit the ground running. But what does modafinil do? Do Xanax puts you asleep? Yeah. I mean, I have narcolepsy. It's an narcolepsy medication. But. How does that work with the steroids? I mean, they work well together, you know? Yeah. Nice focus and physical recovery. But in terms of traveling and training stuff, it is. I mean, we're lucky cause we got so many high level guys so we can travel, and they're still. Still in good hands. I mean, it would be a problem if me, Nikki Rod, and Nikki Ryan left and the gym had Ethan. That would be a problem. But we got to make sure it's not just him that. Although everyone says they're happy when you're gone, so. That's the rumor I heard. Happy when I'm gone. But they do miss me. Yeah, for sure. Until I get back. All right. What about you? Just, like, balancing it? Do you try to stay completely focused on competing for some of the big match you have coming up? Are you able to kind of diversify? Well, I like to diversify my training to where if I'm don't have a competition scheduled, I'm more focused on skill development and, you know, getting better and broadening. Broadening my tool shed. But, you know, if I'm, like, six weeks before comp, I really start amping up the intensity that I bring into the mats against bringing some of that visual visualization towards practice. And maybe I train less volume pre competition, but higher output per session. Yeah. What is a perfect week of training. Look like if I'm not in, if I'm not in competition mode? I would say Monday, Wednesday, Friday, twice every other day. Just once if I'm pre comp, just Monday, Monday to Sunday, once a day. So that's on the mat. You're doing the full, like, positional training, live training bicep curls. Oh, yeah, I do a lot of bicep curls. Yeah, I lift a few times a week now. Yeah. Yeah. Cardio or no, cardio is all math. Cardio is all matt stuff. I do. I do do some CrossFit workouts. Like, crossfits. I'll do, like, some emoms or some amraps or crossfit, you know, terms. That's my instagram. Yeah. But, yeah, Crossfit is a good way to kind of, like, push that. That threshold sometimes on the mat because I'm so good, I can't always get that. That, like, full red line. So I'll hop in across the gym, and I'll do some workouts that, you know, bring me closer to death. What. What about you? Craig, what is a perfect week in training look like? Like when you're back home training. I try to be at the gym twice a day every day when I'm back, just because I travel a bit more than these guys. So I try to be there eight and twelve every day, hang out in between, usually, definitely, usually train both of those sessions depending on how my body feels. So doing positional, doing everything, technique positional live. I should probably do more positional because I'm just trying to work on wrestling and stuff. And especially leading up to the Volkanovski's last fire, I was trying to wrestle more and focus on those areas even before I travel over there. Just some experimentation with some stuff. But, yeah, how do you experiment with stuff? Like, how do you. So there's like regular positional stuff, but when you have ideas, like what? Like, where do you do it in during the training sessions to do it outside of that? You get, you get together with somebody. Usually every session I show up with something. I'm thinking of usually selling from top, maybe something for bottom, but. And then I just try to maybe pick the right people. Some people, obviously, I'm just fighting to the death with, it's not a good time to experiment. And then others, obviously, you can play around with ideas on. Okay, what about you? What's a perfect week look like? Maybe. Well, you said you're 100% now. Yeah. So, yeah, honestly, I have pretty much the same schedule as Nikki Rod. So Monday, Wednesday, Friday, I do twice a day, every other day, once a day, and then normally noon practice is like our biggest class. That's where, you know, all the pros go in. So I tend to do more open rounds there. And then we have a 07:00 p.m. class as well, which is more hobbyist. And that's where I'll do my positional rounds and, you know, force myself to be put in bad positions. So you have what you do 08:00 a.m. twelve, like, in terms of what B team has 08:00 a.m. twelve and 07:00 p.m. and the hobbyists are more. 07:00 p.m. yes. Okay. Do you believe in overtraining? Do you think you can overtrain? I used to not believe, but I, then I got hurt. Oh, you attribute that to over training? I think, dude, I'm telling you, I trained. I lifted like a bodybuilder for like, seven years. And by lifting, I mean I was lifting seven days a week. And I trained arms most days, like, almost every day I would do like, you know, four or five sets and get a, get a pretty good bicep in addition to my lift. I think that had to contribute somewhat toward, towards my. What about. Fair enough. Well, what about on the actual mat? Overtraining, like spending too much time on the mat? Well, psychological, physical overtraining, I think you. Can definitely over train, but it's more of a, like, if your body's healthy, you have to make sure your mind is sharp. Like sometimes maybe taking a day away or even, even diverting your attention in a different aspect of training can help you be a little bit sharper overall. Sometimes it can be like, uh, it can get a little like, um, stagnant because you're doing the same stuff over and over. But I think if you just keep like, you know, over training, then your overall baseline just gets higher and you, that become, you become, you know, accustomed to that. Uh, what about you? You don't seem like a guy that overdo. I've heard of it. Never been close to it. I think, uh, controlling, uh, how hard you train is definitely protects you from injury. You know what I mean? Like, if you're redlining yourself and then you're fighting to the death in the gym, that's 100% when you're going to get injured, gonna get sick. So I try to make sure I've, I've had enough sleep, I've had obviously enough food post training. And that sort of helps me to train a bit harder, but still try to avoid redlining myself too much, I. Think established also, like, what days are going to be your peak days. Cause you're either out the week. If you're training seven days a week, you're going to have ups and downs. Like, for me personally, when they. Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, usually my best days. And besides that, also have other great days. All my days are great, but Monday, Wednesday, Friday are also great. You're like, unable to admit that some days are often. I'm always on, bro. Okay. What advice would you give to people who are not always on hobbyists? How to get better. Like, people that are already there. I don't know. Purple bells, brown bells, black bells. They're just like doing like a couple times a week or something like that. Like, how do you get better? I think being consistent, like, find a schedule that you can consistently train. Maybe it's like, you know, three, four times a week or even a little bit less. Just be consistent over the, over the years. I think too, too often people are like, oh, I want to get really good, really fast, and it's so, like, definitely takes a long time to get to where you want to be. What about the. What you're doing during, like, while being consistent, what kind of stuff you're working on? So, honestly, I think one big thing for me, which something I actually started doing once. Once b team was formed, was filming all of your rounds and then watching it every day because you can see what specific problems you're having, and then you can base your positional rounds around those problems. That's really interesting. It's kind of depressing, though. Yeah. Like, sometimes I have to. You know, I edited this podcast for a long time. I still do in part, and I hate the sound of my voice and, like, what I look like. It's tough, but it does make you better. Yeah. And I also hate the sound of Craig's voice. This would be doubly difficult, but I'm glad, glad the rest of you are here. I don't know, know. That's. That's. Do you. What, do you watch competition footage of yourself or. No. Um, like, to analyze, like, my confidence. That's fucking good. While you're doing curls. Yeah. Is there advice you, Craig, would give for hobbyists to get better? I mean, just, uh, not every round has to be a fight to the death, you know? I feel like you're going to get into it burnt out. That way you're not gonna learn as much. It's tough. I would say just as a black belt who took juices very seriously for a very long time, basically, when you become a hobbyist, your skill is basically slipping your age and your skill. And so not taking stuff seriously is actually its own psychological skill of, like, you go that it's tough. It's tough. Like, it's tough in a way that is different. When you're like a blue belt or something, that you're. If you work hard and you train correctly, you're gonna get much better. Here. You're kind of. You're looking downhill. You're looking downhill and you're like, yeah, I guess I'm gonna enjoy the art of it. Reframe the victory. You know? Like, if it's a young, upcoming guy and he comes to me, you're like, well, that's a moral victory, you know? Yeah. But then that hat that has to happen, you have to be able to not do that to avoid the injury sometimes, like, if you want. So, yeah, it's a different. It's a different thing. Plus, plus, with me, just because some people recognize me, they coming you have that? Probably. You guys definitely, obviously have that. I've solved that problem. What? How did you solve that problem? Travel around, you do a seminar, anything like that? Yeah. It's believable that you could get submitted once, but if they catch you, give them a few. Yeah. If people tell their friends they submit a bit of seminar one time. Believable. Yeah, they got me four or five times. Yeah, you've robbed them of that. Okay, that's pretty funny. But it's also, they have this energy. Like, they think, you know, they're coming in hot. And I usually like to just basically get submitted quickly twice, and just. It changes everything. It makes it more fun. I've noticed. Let them submit you twice. Yeah. Just, like, very quickly, what you get, like, what are the options? Longer. Hold off. But then it's like. It's very hard to, like. Yeah. If you're a very serious competitor and so on, you take it seriously, then. Yes. But, like, then people go. People. What they try to do, this probably is what happens to you guys. They try to impress you by going super hard. I have people every day come to my gym, try to take me out. Yeah. I just stay sharp, come to practice. Let's get it on. Do you feel that energy? I feel like I need to talk to Craig here for, like, at a seminar. Like, somebody is coming in, like, really hard. Like, a brown belt will come in, like, and they really want to impress you with, like, their technical side. They're a big fan. They've been watching your dvd's. Like, what do you do with a guy like that? I make a complete joke out of the rock, you know, give them the pass, mess with them, do stupid shit, like, rob them of the realness of it, because it's stupid. I'm not going to roll hard with strangers. You know, I feel like you should roll with a circle of people you trust. Injuries happen rolling hard with strangers because that's the same way you get injured in competition, because you don't have that relationship with them. And I should also mention that's probably not a good way to impress somebody's bag. Just going apeshit, going 100%. Oh, yeah. Not at all. I think the beauty of jiu jitsu is, like, the camaraderie of it. Like, as you get to know each other's technical, like, different ideas you have and all that. Yeah. Okay. Do you think Gigi jitsu is dying in popularity, Craig? Yeah, it's long dead. I think it's just. I mean, it just shows, like, I mean, I have heard some numbers on the viewership for the GE worlds finals, and they don't even compare to the undercard of, like, who's number one. So I think, like, when I was coming up and competing in the ghill, the time you looked at those guys that won black belt championships and you were like in awe of them, it almost had that ADCC champion feel, but now that's not the case. You know, I just feel like that the younger generation aren't looking at who's winning. Black belt guy welds I personally don't think. And I don't think they're like, they want to be that guy. They want to be like a ritual. Oh, Gordon, you know, those are the people they want to emulate. So you think, like, the gear, like Abby Jjdemen of Gee tournaments will just keep declining popularity? I think people still do. I mean, it's easier, I think, as you over 30 because the key is a bit of a slower thing and the master's participation is bigger in the key because obviously in Nogi is now heading in a wrestling direction. Wrestling in hill hooks, you're over 30. That's a terrifying prospect. You know what's terrifying about the gi? Less so. I think in a participation rate, the IB's Jeff will still be good, but I just don't think people are as interested as they used to be. Why is wrestling and heel hooks terrifying? Well, heel hooks I can vaguely understand. If you don't understand heel hooks, if. You work a desk job and you've never wrestled and a guy double legs you, that's going to probably break your back. You know, I think the older guys are scared of wrestling. It's hard to wrestle at 40 to. Learn wrestling at 40. Yeah, yeah. I mean, I think it's even just hard in general to do wrestling at 40, but it's easy to pull guard, pull half guard in the gear at 40. I think it's hard to do judo at 40 and people still do it at 40. Judo hurts more, Judah. Scarier than all of them. Yeah, I think. Does wrestling really hurt at 40? I don't know why I'm looking at you. Yeah, it does. Interesting. I mean, I feel. I agree with you saying that judo looks like the most dangerous. Like, even their, their practice partners, they're just getting slammed flat. Bueno. Yeah, I did. I mean, I did judo for a really long time. There's a lot of people that are 40, 50, 60 do judo, and they get. They're the ones that are still alive, though. It's true, uh, survivor bias. You do a little bit of, uh, judo, right? Me? I'm a yellow belt. You're a yellow belt and judo. I should be your instructor. Promote you to orange. I got a yellow belt in the 6th grade, I believe was the 6th grade. I did it for about, I don't know, six months. But you're also using, uh, judo in competition and basically, aren't you doing, like, horai type throw, like you're doing? Yeah, I don't know where I learned that. I just started doing it. You just started lifting your leg in various ways until it works. Just figuring it out. Yeah. Okay. Doing different kinds of tricks. I looked at the samba guys doing. I was like, can't be that hot. Yeah. Gave it a crack. Well, they looked at your foot locks and they said, that can't be that hard. They said, can't be that hard. Ban it from the tournaments. All right. What do you think is the best takedown in nogi jujitsu? Like what? Like, if people were trying to train for competition. So on, like, where you see the trends heading? I think those foot sweep is like, catching fire nowadays. See a lot of foot sweeps, foot sweeps and arm drags. I would say pretty, pretty popular in our sport. Arm drags. She's just got arm drag to. Okay, arm drag. Either to get them, like, get to behind them or even just to cause reactions, make them pull away and we can start re attacking. Are you talking about it in a context of what's the best takedown to score? What's the safest takedown to mitigate the risk of guillotine submission or most effective in general? Yeah, most effective combined? Combined, yeah, yeah. I mean, I mean, ultimately it's about scoring. I think any sort of, uh, body lock, you know what I mean? Locking your hands around the body, you've been able to put it to the floor that way. I feel like that's most effective save. It's might even have arisen out of a leg attack, leg entry, upgrade to the body. What about, uh, like, foot sweeps? Like outside foot sweeps with what do we. I would say, yeah, you know, uh, foot sweeps from outside foot sweeps or even like, something like you're tossing a Pullman body and you're sweeping the foot. Yeah, those are all pretty safe. See, why is that scary? I don't understand. It's not scary at all. I think it's the lifts that are scary. The lifts? Yeah. Who's lifting people? I like a good lift return. No, not you. I mean, in master, like, we're talking about older guys doing no geek. Some of those old bosses take it very serious. They just start lifting TLT welts. They're coming. They're coming to impress. Grab and lift. All right, just for the gram. Okay, what about submission? What's your favorite submission? And what do you think is the most effective submission except the buggy chair joke? I would have to say the rear naked. It's definitely the one that's hit the most and the highest level of competition was that. That was pretty interesting to see you escape all that and to put it on. That's the cool thing about Ebi, to see like the world class athletes. I was surprised that it's possible to escape with you on his back. Gonna try some b cream. Oh, yeah, b cream. What's in the beat? What's the formula? Or is that a secret? That is a proprietary blend. Okay, but that's what you use for greasing. That's what you before allegedly does it. Other application outside of grappling or. I'm sure you can get creative. All right, thanks. Asking for a friend. Is that RNC for you as well? Or naked renegade choke? I mean, overall favorite for like, solidifying a finish. Cause like, you could push, you could put somebody sleep, right? Even if they don't want to tag, put him to sleep. But as far as like something I've been working on, now that I'm, I'm now starting to implement in competition. Yoko Senkaku side triangle is like, it's a beautiful thing. You have multiple options. You have the triangle to finish. If that fails, you have the kimora. You could break the arm. You could also just transfer and take the back. So Yoko san Kaku, I'm a big fan of, and I continue to progress and get better at it. Have you ever broken anyone's arm? Oh, yeah. I mean, the first 1st few competitions. Cause I was like, you know, pretty athletic grappler or athletic wrestler. Going against like local black belts and brown belts. Like my, one of my first matches, I broke somebody at kimora. Pretty much every time I've got a heel hook, which is only twice I've broken an opponent. If I have a joint lock, it's probably going to break like a lot of times it breaks before they attack. Yeah. You seem like a really friendly fella. How hard is it to break an arm or any break a joint? Well, I don't think it's that hard. I think, like, if you're talking like an, about an arm bar, we have this position to where like, people are kind of holding on to holding on, and then it slips and their arm starts going, and then it just. Just breaks before they even, you know, get a chance to tap. I love the sport. I knee barred a guy, and he didn't tap one time. And it was actually. It was surprising. I had to put a lot of force into that as opposed to arms, shoulders, and the ligaments in the knees and ankles. But to fully. This kid, sambo kid, fully let it go and he tapped it. I think the angle is, like, up. Here, they're built different. Hopefully, he can be reconstructed. All right, what about a straight foot lock? You've ever. Do you guys do straight for locks at all, or. No? Yeah, I mean, I'm learning them now. We had some kid come. Come into practice one day and, like, straight for, like, just this little, like, polish kid. Not only did he footlock everyone, but he told the entire world, his friends. And family, we practically put a hit out on him in practice, and he just. Everybody. Yeah. So it's interesting when you get, like, yeah. People that specialize can surprise you that this could be effective stuff. Do you think there's other stuff that could be still discovered in jiu jitsu? Like, what. What areas do you think are ripe with techniques to discover? Like, wrestling is really interesting now. There's a lot of innovation happening in wrestling. I think there'll be more innovation when we get people that are more adamant about standing up from bottom position. I think if we get more of the community, they're like, all right, I want to get off the bottom. I think just stand up. Just stand up. How you just. It doesn't work. We actually changed the name how sambo doesn't work. If you just did, you really. Yeah. All right, I'll change it to jiu jitsu when I pirate it and send it for free to the entirety of the soviet bloc. Hey, Nikki, Rod, do you think ego is useful for martial arts, or does it get in the way? Okay, I think you need to use it in both ways. For sure. Have an ego. Like, if you're. If you're training, competition mode, but also it can prevent you from learning and progressing if your ego is too high. Like, you really have to shut the ego down when you're in the mode of learning and trying to, you know, develop skills. Cause you're gonna put yourself in these bad positions. You're gonna have issues with, uh, training partners that aren't necessarily, you know, up to. Up to your skill level, but because you're in these bad positions, you have to make these certain sacrifices. And for sure, ego can be a good or bad thing. But if you're able to shut the ego off and learn, then that'll have huge progression when it's time to put the eagle on into use during competition. When's the last time you put shut the ego off? It's been a long time. What about you, Craig? I mean, you seem to be super easygoing. Is there, like, is the ego just not part of it? Oh, for sure. I just don't want anyone to know they've damaged my ego. You know, you have to suppress it deep down. There's a child underneath all of it crying always, for sure. I think ego is good for a bit of perseverance, you know, like, it'll help you stick it out against a tough battle with a training partner, for sure. Bit of egos on the line. Plus the bands are back and forth. We're trying to, like, stir each other up a bit. I think that helps hone, sharpen the ego a bit. What about you? Do you seem like a super humble guy? Is there like a monster underneath? It's a total act. It's an act. Who's in the basement? I think ego is a big motivator. You know, I think it's very good to have in the aspect that it, like, it'll drive you to help, to want to be one of the best in the world. But like Nikki Rod said, you need to be able to turn it off in the training room and, you know, force yourself into bad positions where you may not be winning. Are there, like, you know, Don hurs mentioned Boris. Are there, like, grapplers? Like Boris? This is a question from Reddit, actually, Boris, like, characters, anybody you've trained with in the past who doesn't compete but is just an absolute beast in training. Like, people you've met, they're just like. Well, somebody that I think has a, probably the best, like, submission grappling in MMA would. I think, like, Gilbert Burns is a, is a historic grappling. He's very, very good. I trained with him early, early on in my grappling career, and I was really impressed by his ability to move, hold down opponents that are trying to stand up. And as a whole, you know, he can, he can get submissions and put people way. Have you, when's the last time, have you trained them recently or. No, no, it's been a few years. Which is impressive ability to submit, you're saying? Yeah, like, I mean, you know, you would see. I'd see Gilbert go against a few, like, pretty decent black belts in the room. And farewell. And, you know, maybe he gets to their back, puts the choke in. It's like Gilbert's super high level grappling or submission grappling. Yeah. But he's pretty widely recognized as a monster, so I don't know that he didn't really answer the question. It's like you're not even remember. What was the question? All right, what, me? Is there people like. You've done all these seminars, are there, just especially in the eastern block. You see, you went to Kazakhstan. Is there killers out there that. Oh, yeah, there's tough guys out there, obviously. I don't remember the names, nor could I pronounce it if I did. But definitely some tough guys out there, obviously carrying skill sets over from wrestling, for sure. Not sambo, but wrestling. Wrestling. Wrestling. But, yeah, just people that surprise you. They just don't compete that are really good. Have you met those? I feel like it's less so today because there's so many. So many more athletes in the sport. But definitely when I was coming up back, like, in Australia and stuff, there were guys I'd train with that wouldn't compete, and that would be, like, super tough rounds for me. Yeah. And there's so many more avenues for competing in general, so. Yeah. What about you? Have you met some monsters? Yeah. One guy I could think of in particular is Jason Ralph. He's. He trains up in Long Island, I think. Right. Opened up his own gym out there. Vanguard. Yeah, Vanguard. He used to compete, but he would never be able to compete at the same level he would train at. So now he's just focused on mainly, you know, opening up a gym and teaching his students. But he was a guy that was, you know, extremely good in the training room, you know, world class. I still think to this day, he's. He's legitimately one of the best in the world. World, but just doesn't compete anymore. Who wins in a fight? A lion or a bear? Polar bear, just for you read it. No, not a pole. Yes, it's a good question. You're all. Your polar bear is pretty impressive. No. Grizzly bear. Grizzly bear. I think grizzly bear wins. Well, who was the most threatening predator in Australia? I mean, it's a tricky question here because everyone's scared of the animals in Australia, but, I mean, you get bitten by a snake, bit by a spider. That's not that bad. Bear America bear will just hold you down to eat you. That's a much more terrifying prospect for me. Even sharks. Sharks gonna be quick. No one sees the shark coming. The sharks just gonna bite you in half. A bear just holds you down and eats you. So that's. That's frightening for me. Australia is a bunch of just weird shit that can kill you. Just see cocaine bear, the movie that's coming. I saw the trailer. It looks good. Yeah, yeah. So there's not every bear. There's, like, black belts and there's black belts. There's bears and there's bears. So that, I think that's what they often don't talk about. Everybody puts lions and bears in the same category. I think there's just some weak bears. A lion would kill a black bear, I think. Not every black. Again, I'm trying to tell you there's difference. But grizzly and polo bound, betting on those. Yeah. No, I think grizzlies have the size, but actually, every video I've seen of grizzlies, they tie within, like, 20 seconds. They get bored. That's the gastang? Yeah, that's a Nikki Ryan Gastang. Right? Yeah, that's all they got. Tree mold. And they try to just. They try to just take a breather. Like, there's these crazy fights between bears in the elastic 20 seconds. I heard this story about a russian family that was attacked by a bear in Russia and killed the dad. And it took so long to eat the daughter, she made three phone calls to her mom. I was eating her. And the first call, the mom thought she was pranking her. That's crazy. That's way scarier than. Yeah, that's terrifying. Give me a snake bite any day. Yeah, you know what? Let me. Let me change. The question is, um, like, if you had to, uh, fight a bear or a lion, how would you try to defeat it? Do you think you have a chance at all? Well, I think I'd attack a lion a little bit differently if I attack a bear. What would be the difference? Okay, well, I've seen this video where, um, alliance are eating, and. And, uh, you have three, like, scratchy guys walk up behind them and kind of scare the cat off of. Off of their food. I think, uh, maybe I produce some props, scare the line away. Right. But if I have to fight it, um, if I have to fight it straight on. I mean, the thing is that you can't. Even if you take the back, like, you can't, like, bite it or choke it, the main is too big to lock your hands around, you know? Are you sure about that? It's like. It's like matted hair, right? I don't know. So I think. You think you can back a draw on a line. Maintain. Yeah, yeah, but, but getting there, getting there. I think I fake how I go low, make them think I'm going for the foot or something. A little Paul sweep. And I take the back. What about, what about a bear? I feel like they're easier. That might be easier to take to hold back control. Yeah, maybe. The thing is, if they. The bear falls on its back, just gonna crush it. So. So big. Substantially bigger than a line, right? Like a full grown. And they're also like terrifyingly, like, loud with their wars and stuff. Yeah, I think. I think so. First of all, if I saw grizzly, I'm like, are he's gonna attack me? I try to yell a little bit louder than maybe the term a little bit. Like give them a. And then. Yeah, for sure. I try to get behind it. I probably go like something weird, maybe like, like pull the eyes out or something, you know? For sure. I mean, I'm going for the vital organs, you know? Play dead. Play dead. And then oil. Check it. There's no. There's no pride in that. Wow. Pride even matters. See the ego, the same advice you gave, you got to put the ego aside with a bear. Even then. Even then. Would you. How would you fight a bear or a lion? Just play dead. Play dead. Yeah, yeah. Could you beat a kangaroo? Joke. A kangaroo? Yeah, kangaroo. I beat the shit out. Kangaroo. Yeah, yeah. I mean, are we boxing gloves? We just like. How would a kangaroo attack a human? Try to kick them with the claws. Knock them down and then they choke him. Stand on that tail. The kangaroos, do. They choke each other? Yeah. They don't choke each other. You don't believe me? You want to watch your video? They choke each other out. I've seen this. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. With which they do them and just grip like this and hold it. What's the grip? What, like a little pause? How are they gripping? I promise you I'm not lying. Pretty sure I've seen the video. They also do strange shit. Like if there's a predator around, they'll wait in a pool of water, and then if it comes to attacker, they drown it. They're pretty smart. Okay. Speaking of which, what's the most effective martial art for winning a street fight? You talked about rule sets and streets. I think you've talked about being a street. Have you ever been in a street fight? Yeah. Just one? Yeah. Nothing special, nothing crazy. Hey. Yeah. You don't talk about that time, like, for self defense purposes, what would be a strategy on the street? What's advice? Whoever wins the street fights, whoever's willing to take it the furthest, the fastest. You know what I mean? If you're thinking you're gonna box and he's biting you, poking your eyes, that guy is gonna win. He wants it more. You know what I mean? That's why the crackheads fight. They go for the kill straight away, you know? So I feel like it's more about who's willing to do the most that's. Going to win that fight fastest, the most fastest. Who's got the least to lose, you know? Okay. We can also define winning differently because you could also run away. But in terms of technique wise, wrestling. I think if it's a one on one, I'd go. I go wrestle. Wrestler wins. But if it's like a, you know, it's like a multiple people, you gotta go muay thai. Stay on their feet. Can't go down to the ground if it's more than one person. Yeah. Big double leg, maybe. Yeah, double leg. Put him asleep on the. On the impact. Right. Four hits the ground. Yeah. What's the goal here? Is to win the fight and not go to prison. Um, I haven't thought of it through that way. Yeah, certainly. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Not go. Not to kill. Mutual combat here in Texas. We good? Is that in Texas? Mm hmm. Do you know if, with the paperwork for that, looks like you have to actually sign something? Can you just say, I don't need to find out. I did hear a story where guys were on 6th street and they looked at a cop. They were like, mutual combat. Mutual combat. And just got, like, the cops to say yes and just duked it out. That could be false, though. That sounds crazy. I kind of admire that. But I've also been playing red dead redemption recently, so I've, like, internalized the cowboy a little. A little too much just to return to gym stuff. No, because it's a business. Because you're running a business, there's money involved, but you're also friends, but you're also training partners. Is there a tension that money creates that threatens to destroy friendships? That's something I always worry about with money. I try not to go do any kind of business with friends or family. I think if we're all very clear and honest and open at the start, makes it Much easier. I think people have issues when there's, like, kind of like things are written in fine print and nobody knows the. Exact answers and a lot of jujitsu guys can't read. That makes it. We're learning that today. Yeah. Hey, no, definitely complicated, though. Yeah. I mean, it's not always obvious to how to be transparent and stuff and about everything. Have you felt that tension? Cause in the jujitsu world, money's not really unlimited. Just running at school. What's that like? Is this the first time you're running a school, running a gym? Yeah. I mean, it's JusT constantly updating people about what's GoinG on, what your expectations are. You know what I mean? We've had some problems with coaches who I feel like, think the pie is bigger than it is. You know what I mean? They feel like maybe we're getting rich out of this and they're missing out on things. So it's like, even amongst managing staff, that can be challenging, too. So, yeah, I mean, it's a constant work in progress, not only to make sure everyone's happy, but to make sure they're comfortable enough to reach out out and tell you they're unhappy. But I feel like those challenges are common amongst any small business. Still, it sucks just to mention I'm clueless to this, but I'm just not learning this. Somebody I met and talked to and I really like is Isaac. And just learned. Because you're also active on Reddit. What's your name on Reddit? I'm John Belushi's mom as on the. COVID as possible, you know? Oh, it's not you. It's actually John Belushi's mom. Right. So I've done my research, I guess. And I guess you guys had a falling out and have split. I just want to say that I don't know the few interactions I've had with him. He's a beautiful human being, so that just shows to me visually, maybe not internally and sexually, just the experience. He's just a kind person. I don't know. I liked him a lot. Like, to me, in a business setting, yeah. Tensions are created and it sucks. I don't know. I mean, I suppose money, all the stuff that happened in the jungle aside, probably money had a role to play to create extra tension. Money and egos about like, who is the leader, who is not the leader. It's tough. It's tough to manage that kind of stuff. I've seen it happen with jujitsu schools a lot. I don't know exactly what. Cause. It's like there is also a hierarchy inside grappling jujitsu schools, like people that are better or not. There's literally ranks, black belt and brown belt. There's like, competitors that are better. I mean, I don't. It's a weird dynamic in which to operate. Cause, like, usually there's more politeness and, like, humanity layered into the way a company works, but here there's just a bunch of. I mean, it's like violence laid on display, play plus money. It's crazy. Is there something you could say to that? Like how you try to minimize or something you want to comment on, Isaac? Yeah, I mean, it was unfortunate situation, but it just didn't work out. You know, like, there's going to be personality clashes, some people. I can't imagine anyone having a personality clash with you. With me? Yeah, it's hard to imagine. Yeah. Surprising, you know, I mean, I didn't even know what to say on that. I don't want to touch on it too much. But obviously his expectations about his role in the gym, obviously different from ours, led to some personality clashes that were sort of unresolvable. You know, some things happen that can't be resolved. You can't fix those things, you know, obviously a lesson, I hope for both of us. Definitely a lesson for me from a management role to try to address these things sooner. But also, so sometimes I came up in a different time where there was no money, no opportunities. I had to pave that. I had to pave that way totally for myself, especially coming from Australia, like, being a professional athlete in jujitsu was not a thing. So I had to pave a lot of opportunities for myself. And I feel like sometimes, oh, I don't know what the right word is. Sometimes people don't appreciate some of the ways you help them them, and they just think, feel like almost they deserve or are entitled to certain things and that is very difficult to manage. But I think, again, like, we, we both SEe the situation different. I do hope he finds a better, a more comfortable place to train. But, yeah, obviously I've known him for a long time, sort of like a brotherly relationship. So that's going to really make personal problems a lot worse when you're that close to someone. I just hated that. Like, I've seen it in jujitsu especially, but in other places where, like, close friendships were destroyed because of, like, gym stuff, like people running gyms. And it's JUst as a PeRSON who is, in this case, JUst a FaN, but in, like, in general, just like a student, it's like, sucks. But again, in my position, sometimes I wonder if there really was a friendship or mere opportunity. I have to be careful of that with some people in the sport. Is it a sincere relationship or, like. I mean, it's difficult for me to tell. Or am I means to an end? Sure. But I think it's actually a trade off because I think a lot of close friendships we have, like, even relationships we have, like, when tested, like, can break if they're not properly communicated. Like, some of it could be just misunderstanding of, like, for prolonged period of time. Not, not. It's not explained through just like, a lack of integrity. It's just like you, like, you have to, like, talk through that shit. Like, just be honest with each other. Take some MDMA and really get down to it. A drugs solve everything people are eating from this conversation. I've actually haven't done MDMA yet. People say that that's something I would enjoy a lot because my brain is, I think, natural on MDMA. I'd recommend it for sure. For sure. Is that what you do with Gabbie and Valtai? Okay, never mind. She drugs me. In general. Why does there seem. Always seem to be drama in the jujitsu world? Like, outside of. Outside of what's going on here? Or is that just. I think it's universal to anything. Drama is everywhere. And then drama rises to the surface. Drama makes the money. Yeah, I wish there was a little bit less. You have a bunch of, like, we mentioned some of them. You have a bunch of instructionals out. What are some interesting things that you're looking forward to, like, exploring in terms of teaching? So just stand up is your most recent one, right? Yeah. You also have one called power bottom, an inclusive, modern approach to the guard. Yeah, you're tied. What are some other. What are some other ones? False reap allegations. False reaper allegations. Yeah. By the way, people talk about powerbot again, hilarious title, but they say it's a really good instructional. Unlike the guard. Yeah, I tried to. I try to at least be innovative, you know, like everyone else. I feel like ripping off John and Gordon, putting some sort of slant on that. So I'm trying to take sort of a different approach. I think you can actively influence the sport with what you release because people are going to try to emulate that. I think that's those type of instructionals just then up power bottom, like, approaching the sport differently, I think definitely has a positive impact on how people play the game. Are you working on something now? Probably a fundamentals course. Just because we're bringing out. We got the white belt program coming in, so I'm trying to develop a fundamentals course along the line of the constraint based learning stuff we were talking about today, like a way to approach learning as a beginner, to sort of speed up the process a bit and not make it as so technique dense, at least have it a bit more fun. And focusing in on just like examples of problems to solve. Exactly. Yeah. Approaching jiu jitsu, learning that way. Like, I mean, kids learn quickly through games. I think adults are capable of that to a certain extent as well. You're releasing that instructional on pre match preparation? Yes. What other stuff do you ever think in a body lock pass? Yeah, I have a hover body lock or rotty lock? Dvd or instructional? Yeah, I had the pre match ritual coming out. I also have, I'm filming how to build athleticism for grappling. I'm just really trying to capture different angles, kind of like the same, you know, what Craig's doing. Try not to do the same thing that everybody else does. You know, there's a ton of wrestling, ton of jujitsu. Instructional. Instructional. So. And the steroids results are coming out? Oh, yeah. Yeah. More plates, more dates. You know, Derek, that runs, that hit me up for a blood panel test, like an impromptu. And I did it a few days ago and I believe the results will come out shortly. Oh, yeah. I do know the results. What are you betting on, Lex? We think it's hard. That's hard to believe. Yeah, it's, it's, yeah, it's very, very impressive. You put me. Yeah. Awkward position here. Do you, do you think you'll face Gordon soon? I'm open to it. I don't know. I don't know how soon. Maybe in the next six months. I could see me facing him before ADCC Worlds. I think that's a great rivalry. I think it's a really interesting one. It's fun for me. Is there any chance that the two, the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany, get back together? That DDS, under whatever name, gets back together? No, absolutely not. Highly unlikely. I mean, we kind of did this to back up Nikki Ryan and we're sticking with our guy. So what do you think? Yeah, I think there's just too many personality conflicts for it to really ever work again. Do you think there will always be war in the world? War? Yeah. Oh, yeah. I think from the, from the beginning of time it's, it's been, you know, some kind of war, some kind of battle, controversy. It's what helps people evolve until AI, super intelligent AI, becomes way more powerful than humans and humbles all of us with its power before it destroys us. Well, until it runs out of batteries, I guess I'm screwed. Get the unplugged. I'm really fortunate to be able to hang out with you, to train with you, and thank you so much for talking today. That's the best ending. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Craig Jones, Nikki Rod, and Nikki Ryan. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Miyamoto Musashi. You must understand that there is more than one path to the top of the mountain. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.

Utterances:
Speaker A: How would a kangaroo attack a human?
Speaker B: Knock them down and then they choke them?
Speaker A: The kangaroos? Do they choke each other?
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: They don't choke each other.
Speaker B: You don't believe me? You wanna watch your video? They choke each other out.
Speaker C: I've seen this.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: I mean, probably the most annoying one was obviously the one where I had Gordon Amber. I was like, tap, bro. And he wouldn't tap, so I let him out.
Speaker D: I didn't get surgery. I didn't do essentially any rehab. I just have no acl in my left leg.
Speaker A: So what's it like having no HCL surgeon?
Speaker B: Guys, you've got two options. Surgery, rehab. Only suddenly Nikki goes, I'll do nothing. Yeah. I mean, what could possibly go wrong if you're the world's best grappler hates you, and you're gently provoking him behind the scenes every day?
Speaker A: Well, I mean, in Texas.
Speaker B: And you've stolen his brother, held him for ransom.
Speaker A: It is like a story of a shitty western.
Speaker B: The last part of a difficult wake up for me is I try to find a sad movie and at least cry about a pound out. That really gets me over the line.
Speaker A: What are the rules in the streets?
Speaker B: Do you think if you were on steroids, you would have finished the joke?
Speaker C: I mean, for sure.
Speaker B: Who knew that the cure to the dagestani wrestling were the Aussies?
Speaker A: The following is a conversation with Craig Jones, Nikki Rod, and Nikki Ryan, who, together with Ethan Krellinston and others, make up the b team, a legendary jiu jitsu team here in Austin, Texas. It was formed after the so called Donahar Death squad, the team, headed by John Donahar, split up into new wave Jiu jitsu and b team Jiu Jitsu, both located here in Austin, Texas. There has been a lot of trash talk back and forth, including accusations of greasing and steroid use. And I, as a practitioner and fan of grappling jiu jitsu and martial arts in general, am here for it to see the best grapplers in history go at it, both on the matae and on instagram. I like the people on both teams and train with both, and am really happy to see the exciting, rapid evolution of the sport that these athletes and coaches are catalyzing. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Craig Jones, Nikki Rod and Nikki Ryan. Craig, can you introduce everyone?
Speaker B: Yep. So we got Nikki Rudd here, brown belt two time ADCC silver medalist Nikki Ryan here. That's it.
Speaker A: Who are you.
Speaker B: And I'm Craig Jones, also two time ADCC silver medalist.
Speaker A: Silver medalist. So, the number one loser. Number one loser, and maybe a little bit more. Your bio says, widely known as the black belt slayer. Hails from New Jersey, the land of pizza and biceps.
Speaker C: Yes, that's pretty accurate.
Speaker A: Okay. You also do carry a gun on you a lot.
Speaker C: Yeah, I keep it loaded. You know, keep it on me.
Speaker A: Uh huh. You have one today in the car. That was a mistake. That was your first mistake.
Speaker C: Yeah. I think you're too close. Very uncomfortable.
Speaker A: And you are? Nikki Ryan. What else is there? What else do we know?
Speaker B: Gordon Ryan's brother.
Speaker A: Gordon Ryan's brother.
Speaker D: Waiting for that one.
Speaker A: All right, so. And you're all together, part of the leadership of the b team here in Austin. Let's just get out some introductory questions. What, in general, accomplishment of the things you mentioned you're most proud of?
Speaker B: I mean, I'm proud just to not have to work a full time job just to get by on the bullshit I've done so far.
Speaker A: Yeah. Honestly, just making money off a thing you love.
Speaker B: Exactly. Yeah.
Speaker A: When was the first time you made money on a thing you love?
Speaker B: Probably a jujitsu tournament, I think maybe in Abu Dhabi, where I won a $1,000. Thought I was rich.
Speaker A: Yeah. Yeah. What'd you spend $1,000 on?
Speaker B: Probably something bad. Probably drugs or something at the time. Maybe blew it at the afterparty.
Speaker A: That's a good introduction to Craig. So what about you? When's the first time you made money with Hanji jitsu? Or what's actually stepping back? Like, what's the thing you're most proud of? Is it a similar kind of thing?
Speaker C: I think. I think I'm most proud of is. I mean, for sure, two ADCC silver medals, which hurts because you're so close to getting that gold, but, you know, it takes time. I'm understanding that, you know, sport of jujitsu takes quite a while to be at the tip top, to be the absolute best. So I'm just being consistent in my training and my craft, and I'll get that number one spot one day.
Speaker A: What failure or loss is the most painful to you?
Speaker C: I don't know. I have a pretty short term memory, so my losses, I just, like, I'll just forget about. Yeah, I mean, for sure. My loss AT. At this past ADCC in the finals. You know, that one sung a bit. Cause I definitely thought I was going to win. I mean, like, it takes a while to produce the skills or the reactions more so that you need to have to be, you know, to be that number one pound for pound guY. Um, and, you know, uh, pre ADCC, I was coming off an injury, so it took me a little bit to, uh, find the right mentality and physicality that I needed in order to, you know, get the wins that required gold. So, yeah, it's just process.
Speaker A: IntereSting. You keep saying process, like, it takes a while to build up. So you're not like, thinking of a loss. Like, ADCC is like, uh, a specific failures. You're not. You haven't gone long enough in a particular process to being a champ.
Speaker C: Well, I mean, for me, I'm coming. I'm closing in on five years of specifically jiu jitsu training. I'm about. About four and a half right now. And, yeah, it's just you kind of. You constantly have these ups and downs in training where, like, as long as you stay consistent, you'll have a gradual raise. But, you know, it's still. You have these peaks and lows and, you know, just. Just trying to get better every day. I'm definitely not where I will be in a few years, in a few years from now, but striving to get there.
Speaker A: Are you actually a brown belt or was that a joke?
Speaker B: Brown belt.
Speaker A: Yeah, you're a brown belt. Like, how many stripes?
Speaker C: No stripes.
Speaker A: No stripes.
Speaker C: Stripeless.
Speaker A: Okay. Is that part of the process that you're working through?
Speaker C: Definitely part of the process. I mean, I think a black belt is just based upon how much knowledge you have. Obviously, like, you know, if you're talking competitive wise, like, from when I started, I was able to beat most black belts. That's just kind of how I was gifted from my. My wrestling experience. And, you know, the time will come when it's right, but I'm not in a rush at all. I'm continuing. I just kind of take every day for what it is and try to improve upon that.
Speaker B: I mean, I want to give him the black belt. Nikki Ryan says he's not ready.
Speaker A: What is? Are you guys like us? No. Gee, folks, do you take that seriously, like, the black belt or, like, how much does it come into play? Into?
Speaker D: Yeah, I mean, it's like Nikki Rod said, you know, it's based off of knowledge, not just, you know, what you do out on the competition mats. Cause, you know, like you said, he had years of wrestling experience, and obviously he's very physically gifted. So we grade based off of the amount of knowledge that you have.
Speaker A: Like, how do you measure knowledge?
Speaker D: I think teaching is a good measurement. Of it, like, how well you're able to show the moves and, you know, really make sure that you have an understanding of what you're doing.
Speaker A: Yeah, it's an interesting rank. It's like, it's something that takes many years to accomplish, and for a lot of people, it's truly meaningful. It's like it represents a particular step in a journey. But for you guys, it's almost, like, different because you've been so focused on competition that I guess if you take it seriously, it is a big step for you, too, like, as martial artists, that's bigger than just being, like, top of the world competitors, right? So I thought it was a joke. You guys are actually taking it seriously like that.
Speaker B: He's a brown belt.
Speaker A: He's a brown belt. And you're taking seriously the rank of black belt. And, like, it's part of. It's part of your journey.
Speaker C: I think by the time I get a black belt, I'll be number one, pound for a pound. I think it'd be pretty nice to accomplish that as a brown belt and then maybe toss a black belt on.
Speaker A: Top, maybe get promoted on the podium. What do you guys. Do you love winning or hate losing more?
Speaker B: I definitely don't hate losing. If it pays the bills, I don't mind.
Speaker A: Oh, really?
Speaker B: Yeah. But honestly, if I win, I feel more relief than anything. Rather than, like, excitement and stuff, I'm like, oh, fuck, thank God that's over.
Speaker C: You know, I hate losing for sure, but I understand that it's necessary to get, you know, to get to where you want to be. Um, and then winning is like, I mean, what? I think winning is probably the closest you could think you can get to, like, heroin or something. Cause, I mean, we're on a, like, if you do have extreme success in a torment that you've been, you know, adamant about training for and competing in for a while, and you end up winning it. I mean, I feel like you're on that high for days at a time afterwards.
Speaker B: Heroin's gotta be better.
Speaker C: You think so? I'm. I'm a stick with no, but I'm.
Speaker B: Not gonna suck dick to win.
Speaker C: You suck it for heroin. I guess that's a good point.
Speaker A: Yeah, but, you know, like, because you. You come from a little bit of the wrestling culture. One of the things I really love is at the end of the match when they lose, they just. There's no. They just run off. They're, like, almost pissed off. It's like some mixture of anger and frustration at themselves.
Speaker C: I think I think sometimes that people, like, freak out on the mat, and I think that's just a. To show everybody, like, they're acting like they cared a lot and really, maybe they didn't work enough to, you know, get to where they want to, where they expect it to be, and they lost, and then they had this big boost of emotion, like, after they're. After they lost. But, uh, yeah, I mean, I think you just cry in the mirror and not to everybody else.
Speaker A: You know what? Have you ever cried watching a movie?
Speaker C: I don't think I've ever cried, period.
Speaker A: Okay. Have you cried watching a movie?
Speaker B: Not yet. Not yet.
Speaker A: The notebook.
Speaker B: I try to avoid those lines. It's actually. I lie, actually.
Speaker A: Titanic.
Speaker B: The last part of a difficult wake up for me is I try to find a sad movie and at least cry about a pound out. That really gets me over the line. Low energy, cutting the tears.
Speaker A: There's other following liquids I could talk to you about, but let's just continue on low energy. What about you, Nikki? Love of winning versus hate of losing.
Speaker D: I'm a very competitive person, so I for sure hate losing more than I like winning. I do think it's something that's kind of held me back over the past few years because it makes it so that I'm not as active as I should be, because it's like, I really hate that feeling of after a match that you just lost. So it kind of prevents me from competing. So it's definitely something I need to work past.
Speaker A: So when you think about a competition, the possibility of losing, which is always there in competition, is the thing that, like, weighs heavy on you in the months and weeks leading up to it.
Speaker D: Yeah. My whole life, you know, my financial stability, everything depends on, you know, my ability to go out there and compete and my ability to teach. So, you know, it's. It's a huge hit to the brand if you lose. So, you know, leading up to matches, that's. That's definitely something that's in my mind.
Speaker A: I know you. So you guys are, like, world class athletes, but for me, more like a hobbyist competitor. I compete a lot. The thing I was. Cause I really wanted to win. The thing I was probably most afraid of is not just losing, but, like, embarrassing myself.
Speaker D: Yeah.
Speaker A: Even actually winning by stalling. That was the thing I hated the most about myself in terms of crying in the mirror, is, like, being too afraid to take risks after I'm up on two points or something.
Speaker C: I think you gotta. In competition, sometimes it's good to take the emotion out of it. It's too easy sometimes to think about all my girls in the crowd. My family's watching. I wanna win cause they're there. But at the highest level, if you're emotional at all, no, that's affecting you.
Speaker A: Yeah. That's tough, though. That's tough. Especially, like, leading up to when you're on the map, maybe. But leading up to it, I think.
Speaker C: It'S okay to be emotional prior, like, you know, if we know ADCC or is coming up and we have a big match, like, definitely. I'll go out in practice and I'll. I'll visualize. I'll put myself in that competition. That way, when it's game time, it's like I've been there a thousand times already.
Speaker A: So not the actual competition, but even leading up to it, like, stepping on the mat, like, all the walk. Walk towards it, all that.
Speaker C: All that stuff, like, I'll do the same exact warm up for weeks on end until my competition day comes. That way, you know, when I compete, I'm just like, oh, it's another Tuesday at practice.
Speaker A: What about you, Craig? How do you prepare mentally for a tournament like ADCC?
Speaker B: I push it completely out of my mind. Don't even think about it. Try to avoid any visualization, any rituals, warm ups, anything like that. Block it out until the last second. Yeah, try not to think about it. I just got a training to have fun, learn a bit. So I try to approach competition the exact same way. I don't warm up at training. Do very little warm up for competition.
Speaker A: Uh huh. And, uh, you just step on the mat?
Speaker B: Step on the mats. My philosophy is there's no warm ups on the street.
Speaker C: We're so vastly different.
Speaker A: All right, uh, so you like legit, don't warm up?
Speaker B: No, I probably should now I'm 31, but I would just like. In the gym, they get easy the first round, you know? Like, if I look around the room and Nikki Ryan's down, might go, all right, we'll have an easier first round today.
Speaker A: So even for, like, the most high stakes matches, you try to push it out?
Speaker B: Yeah, I didn't even think about it.
Speaker A: What about, like, all the social, like, Instagram posts you have to do about that match? You just make a joke out of it and kind of.
Speaker B: Yeah, I mean, kind of pretty silly. You know, we're just wrestling each other. You know, we put the meaning into it. But to someone that doesn't follow the sport, it looks stupid.
Speaker A: Well, all of human existence is pretty silly. Like, what are we doing. None of us really know what's going on. We kind of have sex to reproduce. We get hungry, we eat, and then we're all chasing money and cars and whatever the hell in a capitalist society. Or we worship a dictator in a authoritarian regime. Yeah. And then we get off on the. We let power abuse us, and then we just murder others because we get off on it. Yeah. And then eventually all of us will die because the sun will run out of energy, because colonizing other planets is very difficult, so none of it matters. It's a good, good philosophy. It's pretty good.
Speaker B: That's exactly what I'm saying.
Speaker C: How does the sun run out of energy? You call me there.
Speaker A: It'S burnt out. It's a nuclear fusion engine that eventually.
Speaker B: Burns out of, like when you get tired of training.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker C: It's never happened. I try to get tired. I like, dude, it's not working.
Speaker A: All right, cool. So you legit don't care about losing. It doesn't weigh heavy on you.
Speaker B: I try not to list. Like, if I win, I try to block out all the compliments, all the niceties and stuff. So I try to do the same with losing. It's happened. Move on to the next one. You know, don't dwell on it too.
Speaker A: Much and sometimes make a joke out of it.
Speaker B: Yeah, exactly. Winning or losing, with the right joke, we can make money off of the event that's just transpired. That's what's most important.
Speaker A: Excellent. Thank you. I have a bunch of your merch.
Speaker B: Oh, nice. This one's the Jordan Burrows rip off.
Speaker A: All I see is silver. The way pronounce Burrows is very sexy. Okay.
Speaker B: I throw lines at people and I try to gauge their reaction. Like, sometimes I'll say something to Nikki, and I'll be like, all right, that's probably crossing the line. You know what I mean? We'll tone it down to the public.
Speaker A: Yeah. Yeah. So it's not just right. You have to think, is this crossing the line?
Speaker B: Yep. Yep. I get as close to it as possible.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: I feel like you can't really cross it.
Speaker A: Just a little bit.
Speaker B: Just a little bit. Yeah.
Speaker A: Okay. Speaking of which, you said that I'm Switzerland in World War two, since I'm friends with both you and Gordon and John.
Speaker B: Very rich country.
Speaker A: Are you a Hitler or Stalin? By the way, in this analogy, would you like to be Hitler or Stalin? And should you make a t shirt out of it?
Speaker B: Or, I mean, a nazi t shirt? I don't know how well that sells.
Speaker A: I think it would. You know, I think, let's brainstorm on this one offline. I think since Hitler lost, so he got second place in World war two.
Speaker B: That's true. That's true.
Speaker A: I think that makes you Hitler anyway, to the degree that you can. Can you tell the story of how the time you've had with the Donna Hart death squad and why you split up?
Speaker B: I competed against Gordon for ADCC and Ebi in 2017. And I remember I competed against him at ADCC. And then we had the Ebi event, and then I had a Kasai. I used to compete all the time, every week. I wouldn't even do the preparation or anything. I'd just be, like, trying to do seminars, make money, and then jump in and compete. I remember I showed up to Kasai after I faced him twice, and there were, like, four locker rooms and they put me with all the DDS guys. It was just me and all of dds. And I think we competed the weekend before, so I thought it was going to be super awkward, but it was actually. It was actually pretty chill. And the Kasai was in New York and they suggested to come train that week, so I came, trained, hung out with them a bit. Ultimately, the goal was to move to America and join a bigger team. Just because that flight to Australia is death. Australia is so far away from everywhere. It's kind of flat. Like, not realistic to base yourself in Australia when all the tournaments are in America. And then I went and trained with the guys and they just had a massive, massively deep talent pool in that room. Like, show up to, like, a meant to be 07:00 a.m. actual 08:00 a.m. class on brazilian time. And there'd be, like, 100 people in there, maybe. I don't know how many black belts, but a ton of elite guys. And I was coming from Australia training with Lachlan Giles, but really, that room was pretty shallow and, like, most people had serious jobs and stuff, so it was, like, basically me just training with Lachlan, maybe a couple of other guys, and then to go to New York and have access to a wide array of training partners and guys that are training twice each day. I feel like that's what you really need. You need people that can train as much as you are.
Speaker A: Yeah. Humbled.
Speaker B: Humble.
Speaker A: Humbled in that room at first, for.
Speaker B: Sure, because my style at the time was basically a rip off version of what they were doing. Leg locks came in. I remember just watching Eddie Cummings nonstop and just seeing this guy rip people's legs off. And I was like, you know what? That's probably a good move. You know, that looks like an easier path to victory than trying to beat these guys at what they. What they're good at already. You know, my philosophy at the time was, if it's bothering old Brazilians, it's bothering them for a reason, it's probably effective. And that's the path I took to sort of try to rip off their moves, and then, obviously, to go into that room, try to do them to them, it's going to be a bit more difficult.
Speaker A: All right, so that's how it started. How did you end up here?
Speaker B: How do we end up here?
Speaker A: We're in Austin, Texas.
Speaker B: I mean, I like to think of Puerto Rico as apocalypse Now. John Danaher as Colonel Kurtzen. Things got very weird in the jungle, and the teams went in two different directions. But honestly, I mean, it's not really my story to tell. I had some issues with some of those people at the time of the split. I got along very well with Jon. I feel like me and him connected very well. I don't know why that was. Maybe it was just because of the. He missed home. He missed a familiar accent, australian, New Zealand accent. But, I mean, I basically followed Nikki, left with Nikki, sort of that core group of guys left with Nikki, and, I mean, I just back there was personal problems. I just backed Nikki, basically.
Speaker A: Got it. Just sticking on you for a bit. Is there a part of you that, you know, finds it heartbreaking that dds split up? Does part of you miss working with John and everybody? Now? Can you steel man the case for that?
Speaker B: I mean, I miss certain aspects of it, but I also do prefer the freedom of being apart from it. It's obviously a very strict regime under John Danaher. You know, obviously, there's parts of it I miss, the parts that the public doesn't see of John, the behind the scenes banter. I feel like he's very conscious of the image he portrays to the world, but basically, it closed doors. He's always making jokes, always finding, I guess, more in line with the australian kiwi sort of culture, but you don't really see that in the public eye. So that perspective. I do miss that relationship with John in terms of setting aside personal differences. Gordon was a good training partner, definitely a good training partner to train with. But obviously, the negative things we can't really talk about outweighed all of those things, and we obviously had to make a decision to leave.
Speaker A: The things that happened in the jungle.
Speaker B: The things that happen in the jungle.
Speaker A: Should never be spoken of that I.
Speaker B: Personally cannot speak of. Yeah. But obviously, I do miss certain aspects. Like, I mean, nothing. Nothing's all bad, nothing's all good, you know?
Speaker A: Yeah. This goes back to your, like, everything we're doing is silly.
Speaker B: Yeah, exactly. That's why I don't get. People take it so serious. Martial arts so serious. It's just pretty stupid, really. Especially in the gi. It looks just. It looks bad, and then, I mean.
Speaker A: It'S pretty silly with. With. And without the gi, it's just a bunch of apes.
Speaker B: What's silly about. No. Gee. And what's silly about the Gi? And just mixed and matched bottoms there, you know what I mean?
Speaker A: Wait, which one?
Speaker B: Sandbag.
Speaker A: I see what you're doing, brother. You come to my house and offend my people. All right, we're going to go to every dark place, apparently. Nick, how did you get with dds? What was that journey like? Is there. Try to see if there's things that you remember fondly that you've gotten from the experience.
Speaker C: All right, so the way I started training with dds, initially, I was training for, like. Well, initially, I was a bouncer, right? I dropped out of college to pursue this fitness modeling career. I ended up signing with a Wilhelmina models up in New York, and I was, like, trying to get in better shape. And while I was bouncing, kind of the talk of, like, you know, who's tougher came up between the wrestlers and a few of the bouncers that train jiu jitsu, and, you know, they convinced me to go to a practice, and I went my first practice over there, and, uh, I. For the most part, I just controlled everybody, got on top of them, was able to avoid, like, kind of, like, you know, shitty submissions because I had an awareness of the sport, and, you know, I'm a fan of fighting, whatnot. So, um, you know, I kind of understood it pretty well. Um, and then soon after that, I joined a school, and my second week of jujitsu, I started competing. Had pretty good success. You know, I was, like, subbing a few black belts and beating everybody, like, you know, pretty decisively with points and stuff. And, uh, about three months into the training, locally, I got connected with, uh, Gordon, Gordon Ryan and John Danaher up in New York, and I started. I committed to, you know, make the drive up there as many days as I could. At the. At the time, I lived in South Jersey, and it was about a two and a half hour, three hour drive without traffic to New York. Where?
Speaker A: Where in south Jersey?
Speaker C: Gloucester county. Um, Clayton New Jersey specifically, but Gloucester county, yeah, so it was about 130 miles and without traffic, you know, about two, two and a half hours or so. But on the way back, man, we, it'd be three plus sometimes, you know, you're catching that rush hour.
Speaker A: What year was this? Do you remember? This was in 2018 for a bit. I forget how young you are. I was there before, before all that. Alright, cool. Anyway, you're doing the long drive and then. And then. And then what?
Speaker C: Yeah, doing the long drive and then, you know, once I won ADCC trials, I was able to make a couple bucks. And then, you know, I got my silver medal at ADCC and I was able to afford to live up there in New York, in north Jersey area. So I lived up there, trained there full time every day. And it was kind of sucked with the team throughout the, throughout the turbulent times. And found ourselves in Austin, in the jungle. In the jungle with the things we.
Speaker A: Shall not speak of. What other things that you remember that you've learned from John Donahuer, from your time you spent with him?
Speaker C: Yeah, I mean, I definitely learned a ton from Jon and the team as a whole. Like, you know, it's, you have to be the guy that asks questions in that type of environment. Right. Cause there's not, it's not, you're not gonna get singled out to be that specific star or the best guy in the room when you have all these other, you know, stud athletes. So I really had to seek out and figure out the kind of questions that I needed to ask. And once I became a bit more verbal with my training and, you know, I, I'm showing, I'm expressing all my curiosities about grappling to these guys. Definitely helped boost my, boost my technique and my career as a whole.
Speaker A: Yeah. Did you understand what kind of stuff, like, technically you want to get good at what fits your body, what, like, what would be good for you, what are your weaknesses and all that.
Speaker C: So initially, and when I started grappling, I had an innate ability to just get to opponents back. So I was like, all right, I'm good at getting to the back. Let me get, let me perfect. Controlling the back and then submitting opponent via rear naked choke. And then besides that, I really focus on leg lock defense. And then eventually came the rotty lock pass where, you know, I'm, I'm really good at body lock. Passing my opponents now and then and, yeah, just takes a quite a long time because you have to find, uh, different sequences and then there's always these, uh, an abundance of opportunities that your opponent gets from these specific sequences. So takes a while.
Speaker A: Is there part of you that finds the fact that dgs split up heartbreaking?
Speaker C: Um, I definitely, you know, having one person to go to that runs practice every day, that's, you know, consistent. Um, it was definitely. It was definitely, definitely a gift. But now I'm also gifted with many, many other partners. I have Nikki Ryan, um, you know, Craig Jones.
Speaker A: Craig Jones.
Speaker C: Yeah, yeah. We have Ethan Crowseen, Damien Anderson. So a full team of knowledgeable athletes that I can continue to go to with multiple questions. But, yeah, definitely, definitely. It took me some time to adjust to training or to learning from, you know, specifically my team. And not just one person.
Speaker A: We should mention for people just listening. Cause you can't visually see that Nikki Ryan is currently terrified and Craig Jones. Jones is currently enjoying the fact that. But anyway, can you talk about your Nikki? Can you talk about your time with DDS?
Speaker D: I started training when I was, like, around 13. My brother Gordon had started prior to me, and I really just went into training just as a means to exercise and lose weight at the beginning because I was pretty fat as a kid. So I went to the first class, loved it, and then just started training every day at Gary's gym, Brunswick. And then during the summer when I would get off from school, they would take me up to New York to train under John. And, you know, I just absolutely loved it. I knew what I wanted to do with my life at a young age, so I ended up dropping out of school, actually, after my freshman year in high school. So, yeah, at 15, I ended up dropping out and just pursuing jiu jitsu full time, you know, training every day up in the blue basement.
Speaker A: What aspect of jiu jitsu was made? YouTube. Know that this is the thing for you.
Speaker D: It's just something I just enjoyed being, you know, like, on the mats every day. I love that there's, you know, a problem solving aspect to it. So it's, you know, it's mentally challenging. It's physically challenging. Helps me get in shape, so I just. Yeah, right off the bat, I knew I loved it.
Speaker A: Okay, so then we'll go to the jungle. What happened in the jungle? And in general, like, I like this. I like this, like this, like, shroud of mystery that she'll never be penetrated. That should never be like, we've got a book deal.
Speaker B: It's coming. Obviously left high school. He's not writing it.
Speaker A: Okay, I'll do the russian translation. Okay, so what are. What are things that you enjoy that you remember from working with John Donahara.
Speaker D: Yeah, I mean, you know, obviously he's considered one of the best coaches in the world, you know, very charismatic guy when you see him in person. You know, I pretty much was, you know, kind of raised in the dds, you know, that's where I spent the, the majority of my time every day. So I obviously had very deep connections, you know, with John, my brother Gary, you know, even Eddie Cummings and stuff back then. So obviously I miss interacting with those guys every day. And, you know, it's like they said, it's good to have somebody to kind of crack the whip at you every day. And John was very good at that.
Speaker A: When you're, like, younger in your teenage years, you can kind of. You like, have to get humbled, right? There's like a process to that.
Speaker D: Yeah, for sure.
Speaker A: And it's a pretty good room to get humbled in, I guess.
Speaker D: Yeah, exactly. I mean, I started training with them just when, like, everybody started to break out. Gary was like the biggest name at the time just because he had 180 cc trials already and he had a crazy match with Kron at Crown, Gracie at ADCC, but Eddie was just starting to break out. Gordon just started winning Ebi. So I started training under John, you know, right when, when everything was exploding.
Speaker A: What are the good things about life about jiu jitsu you learned from your brother?
Speaker D: Both me and my brother never really wanted to, you know, work a full time job doing something that we hate. And he was always, you know, a very confident person, so he just went, you know, full, fully started pursuing jiu jitsu. So I'm very happy that, you know, he did that and I ended up following in his footsteps because you can ask these guys, I'm a lazy sack of shit out of. Outside of the mat. So that's, that's definitely one thing that I'm very grateful for, that he paved the way.
Speaker A: Like, you can, you can make money doing stuff you love.
Speaker D: Yeah, exactly. And he was, he was a big reason, you know, why my parents eventually let me drop out of school, because, you know, when, when they were coming up, there was no money in the sport. It was very hard to make a full living. Like, if you wanted to actually make a living, you'd eventually have to transfer to MMA. And I feel like Gordon and Gary and those guys were some of the first people to make a very good living off of just jiu jitsu.
Speaker A: At this party, you find it heartbreaking that you've split up from DDS but also from your brother in terms of spending time in the mat every day?
Speaker D: Yeah, for sure. You know, I mean, growing up, you know, obviously he's my big brother. I looked up to him a lot, so I definitely, like I said, I miss interacting with those guys. I was pretty much raised in that blue basement. John was like a father figure to me, so I definitely miss seeing those guys every day.
Speaker A: Do you have animosity towards Gordon, and does he have animosity toward you, and what is the source of that? And do you think you'll ever be able to forgive each other?
Speaker D: Definitely. Initially, during the initial split, we definitely hated each other at the beginning, but it's definitely started to calm down, actually, just prior to all this social media drama that's going on currently, he had reached out to me, and that was literally the first time that we have actually talked since. Since the split happened. So we didn't talk to each other for. Was it now, like, almost two years? And that was the first time that, you know, we interacted again. And overall, you know, he wasn't, you know, aggressive towards me. I wasn't aggressive towards him. You were cracking some jokes. So hopefully the animosity is going down.
Speaker A: There's this godfather quote that wrote down, rewatched it from the Don, from Don Corleone. Vita Corleone. The strength of a family, like the strength of an army, lies in its loyalty to each other. Is there some aspect of family that you miss of the blood that kind of connects you, that you can count on?
Speaker D: Yeah, my parents, they both raised us. That family is everything. You never betray your family or anything like that. So I definitely miss them from time to time.
Speaker A: Okay. Imagine you're, like, 40 years from now, sitting on a porch with a shotgun, drinking whiskey, looking over, like, all the land you've conquered. Looking back to this moment, is the reason you split up a bullshit reason, or is it a good reason from the perspective of the king who has now conquered the lands, have proven himself, have done everything?
Speaker D: I think it was definitely, like, a justifiable reason for the team splitting. Like, it just with the way things were going, it just was not going to work with, you know, all of us in the same room together. It started, you know, affecting training. People didn't feel comfortable and things like. So I definitely think that it was a justifiable reason to split.
Speaker A: The things that happened in the jungle.
Speaker D: Yeah.
Speaker A: To be told about in the book. Is it gonna be an audiobook or is it just gonna be, and who's gonna voice it might be a play, a musical. Yeah, on Broadway. How's your singing voice?
Speaker B: Mine's not so good, but Nikki has a beautiful voice.
Speaker A: Does he? Of an angel, Nikki. I bet. Okay. Speaking of the social media drama, I should mention that I've talked to recently to Gordon a bunch. I've talked to him about talking to you guys, and he's had nothing but really nice things to say about you, Nikki Ryan. And he has had nothing but bad things.
Speaker B: What was some of the things?
Speaker A: Well, let's just go to the social media first, because the social media stuff that he said publicly is just like a warm up. It's like foreplay, I guess. So Gordon sent you, Nikki Rod flowers for Valentine's Day. Posting on Instagram, quote, I've been fucking him in every round and competition since we met in 2018. The least I can do is buy him flowers.
Speaker C: We didn't get the flowers.
Speaker A: No. Yeah, that was the question. Did you get the flowers? You never got the flowers?
Speaker B: He sent it to the wrong address.
Speaker A: He did?
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Where do you think he sent it?
Speaker B: It was close, but it was wrong.
Speaker A: Did you appreciate the romantic gesture?
Speaker C: I did. I was looking forward to the flowers and potentially chocolates in there, but, you know, it was a bit of a letdown.
Speaker A: Can you describe your recent match against Gordon? The Ebi match.
Speaker C: Okay, so Ebi match on UFC fight balance was a 20 minutes match. And immediately, you know, match starts. I pull guard, and then I stand up, he pulls guard, and we have this kind of, like, back and forth where he's trying to dig for under hooks, trying to get on top of me, and he can't really find success. And now and. And then in the midst of me trying to work my body lock pass, uh, Gordon's able to under hook a leg, and we end up in a leg entanglement. And then I'm able to transfer that leg entanglement to a 50 50 position. Still, like, it's still in the leg entanglement. Uh, from that 50 50 position, I'm able to, uh, separate his feet and. And actually get a few pops. And he actually said I broke his foot in that exchange with a toehold. The toe hold. Yep. And, uh, you know, after. After that, um, we had a bit more. I was. I was just being, uh, working on top positions, trying get my body lock time runs out, and we go to overtime. In overtime.
Speaker A: Can you hold on a second? Actually, what does it mean to break a leg? Was. I was very confused about. Okay, so is this, like, a expression or. What do you mean when you broke. Which part breaks in a toehold.
Speaker C: Okay, so in a toehold, uh, there's a few different grades of it. Like, you could get a few pops and have some. Have some, you know, walking issues. Um, and people consider that a break. And then you could break it fully and have your foot be like a limp noodle, you know, I think what goes Achilles, what is the front of the Achilles or something?
Speaker B: I mean, probably the ligaments. I mean, it's funny, like, a lot of people say they broke something, but, like, to me, you break bones, you tear ligaments. So I would imagine you probably had a grade three tear.
Speaker C: Grade three.
Speaker A: How hard do you think is it? I always wondered that with, like, a straight footlock, how hard is it to break the shin or, like, the actual bones versus to tear stuff?
Speaker B: Depends how many steroids they're on and obviously how much you're on.
Speaker C: You're one of the few guys that have actually broken bones in competition.
Speaker B: Yeah. Have I? Oh, yeah, Vin, a couple, yeah.
Speaker A: Which bone did you break?
Speaker B: Spiral fracture of the fibula.
Speaker A: Is it a twisting? How did you break it?
Speaker B: Oh, it was a heel hook. Vinny always used to say, heel hooks don't work, leg locks don't work. But unfortunately, age gets the best of all of us. I think he had some mileage on those ligaments.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: And the bone, I guess. Yeah.
Speaker A: So it's actually, what, the bone? Yeah.
Speaker B: His ankle, like, disconnected from the tibia and the fibula. But the fibula definitely snouts pretty bad there.
Speaker A: That's fascinating, the dynamics of that. Okay. Anyway, it went to overtime. What happened in overtime?
Speaker C: Okay, what happened overtime? Let's see. Trying to hang. Oh, okay. I go defense first. Uh, whistle blows. I'm able to escape in, like, 17 seconds. And then immediately after, I go on his back, and he gets out in exactly 17 seconds. I'm like, shit. All right. I thought I had a good start. And then, uh, he gets on my back right after that, and, uh, he's able to ride me out for pretty much the entire round after that. He, uh, I got back on his back, he escapes, and maybe like, a minute and some change. Uh, I think where I went wrong in the overtime is I should have. I should have been less adamant about chasing the submission and more aware of collecting time. If I kind of diverted my attention towards acquiring, you know, time on the clock, it would have been, you know, more in my favor. But, yeah, at the end of my overtime round, I would. I'm able to lock up a rear naked choke over the face, but there just wasn't enough time to fully finish. You know, I got a few seconds of squeeze in there. I didn't have enough time to adjust and. Go ahead.
Speaker B: Do you think if you're on steroids, you would have finished the choke?
Speaker C: I. Yeah, I mean, for sure. For sure.
Speaker B: That's what I thought.
Speaker C: If you're on gear it, you're. You're changing the biology of your body. You're adjusting your DNA for sure. If I adjust in my DNA, I mean, it's a finish.
Speaker A: You're implying you're a natural athlete is what you say.
Speaker C: I'm definitely natural athlete, yeah. Heavy implication.
Speaker A: Okay, so for people who don't know the Ebi rules, it's an interesting rule structure where the over time, you put yourself in, like, the worst possible position and the task is to escape, and then the other person gets the same thing. What do you guys think about that rule set?
Speaker C: I like it just because, first of all, I don't, I don't like the idea of having to put somebody on my back, but I do like the definitive answer in the match. Like, either you escaped in time or you got, you know, written out. So the. Absolutely, like, you have a. You get to the final winner. That's great. I'd much rather have that than a close decision. And it kind of goes other way.
Speaker A: What about you?
Speaker B: I mean, honestly, there's all the different rules. When I look at the rule sets, I just try to think of what rule set I could beat that individual in. And I sort of gear myself towards that. That's really the strategy there. I think there's some guys that like that stall a lot that you would love to have Ebi overtime with at the end. You know, they're stalling until they have to give us a good position. But then there's some guys that are so good in those positions, I'm like, oh, maybe we just do a regular match, you know?
Speaker A: What are the rules in the streets?
Speaker B: The streets? No time limit.
Speaker A: Yeah, that's one of it. There's also, like, concrete and cars.
Speaker B: Biting.
Speaker A: Biting? Yeah. Poking, yeah. So you don't like that rule set. Are there some people you would prefer in the street as a rule set?
Speaker C: Me?
Speaker B: Probably nothing. I don't know. The ebI. I mean, it's tricky, you know, it depends on the opponent, which rules that I'd want to do.
Speaker A: What about you, Nick? What do you think about the rule set of Ebi?
Speaker D: Yes, I think Ebi is very good from a spectator point of view. You know, people find it very entertaining to watch you know, because people want to see submissions and you're putting people, you're putting the athletes in a position where, you know, you have like, the highest percentage submission in the sport. So obviously you're going to get a lot of submissions. My issue with it is it is a rule set that allows somebody that's overall worse at Jiu jitsu to win a match. You know, a guy can go out there and just stall and just get completely dominated for the entirety of regulation, and then he gets to start on the guy's back.
Speaker A: So that's.
Speaker D: That's my one issue with it.
Speaker A: But also, I mean, it's interesting to see, like, the best people in the world have to be put in a really bad position and to see how good their escapes are, for example. Yeah, it's interesting.
Speaker D: Yeah.
Speaker A: But it doesn't feel like a realistic. It's a fun thing to watch, but it doesn't feel like the real fight. Yeah, it feels weird.
Speaker B: I'll claim it. If I start an overtime on someone to finish them, I'll claim it. But if they submit me an overtime on my us.
Speaker A: You good to know? Yeah, it's good.
Speaker C: The issue is people like stalling to just win the overtime. So where you got this guy, this whole training camp is just not get subbed and win the overtime. It's a bit boring.
Speaker A: By the way, I have a rose behind you. Somebody gave me a Valentine's flower, so if you missed the one from Gordon, I got one for you.
Speaker C: Well, I'd appreciate that. Thank you. It's good to feel loved.
Speaker A: All right, so what did you learn from that match? Like, a takeaway is, technically speaking, like, what do you need to work on?
Speaker C: Well, I learned that I am pretty good. Yeah, pretty good. I got a, you know, a few. I know exactly what my weakness is. You know, it's the. The leg lock department, and I'm doing. I'm doing a lot to. To, you know, get better in that specific aspect.
Speaker A: I can defense attack, I would say.
Speaker C: Yeah, attack defense reattacks. Even if I wanted to offensively enter a leg, you know, I could use some work there as well. But I feel like once I solidify, like my, like, if I come in, I'll become a black belt, specifically in the leg lock department. I feel like I'd be unstoppable.
Speaker A: If you, Nicky Rod, definitively beat Gordon Ryan, how would you do it?
Speaker B: Buggy choke.
Speaker C: Buggy choke.
Speaker A: Buggy choke for the listener. I don't even know how to describe buggy choke. What's the definitive, like, conclusion on that joke. Does it work? It's a. It's a choke that you do when you're in a. What's the opposite of a dominant? It's not submissive in a non dominant position of bottom of sight control.
Speaker B: Yeah. Just an embarrassing submission to get caught with. Really?
Speaker A: Yeah. But does it work?
Speaker B: It works on certain people for the listener.
Speaker A: He glassed over at Nicki. It's embarrassing, but it's also. What? It's a way to frustrate the opponent, for sure.
Speaker B: Yeah. It's a new part of the sport. I feel like the Rotola has brought it back into fashion. And even if you don't get it, because it's one of those moves that's so embarrassing, at the first sign of danger, the top guy abandoned ship, and you can basically retain guard by attempting a very embarrassing submission.
Speaker A: So the threat of embarrassment. Yeah.
Speaker B: People pull out very quick to avoid suffering the consequences.
Speaker C: I think some people underestimate how good of a submission it is. I mean, like, once you're locked in there, there's not too many defenses for a buggy joke.
Speaker A: Are you. Is there an instructional on the way from you, J Rod?
Speaker C: Actually, my little brother has one.
Speaker A: Oh, yeah? For real? You actually legit have. Oh, wow. That's awesome. Well, check it out. So, I mean, there is. I mean, you're making a joke out of it, but it is a real, like, there's a system to it.
Speaker B: I mean, yeah, I don't know if we call it a system. It's a good move.
Speaker C: I mean, you take an opponent that was just winning in a greatly dominant position, and then, boom, in that same position, they're pretty much. They're losing. You know, it's an interesting move.
Speaker A: What's the name of the. What's the name of it?
Speaker C: It's called the buggy PDF.
Speaker A: Okay. The buggy pedia. I thought there'd be something, like, very Craig Jonesy about it. Okay, awesome. I know you don't want to sort of reveal the secrets of what you're working on, but in general, what does it take to beat Gordon? I guess.
Speaker C: Okay. It would have to be some kind of a choke, I think. Any joint lock or anything like that, he's just gonna let it break and stay in the match. So I don't even think he'd tap from, like, a renegade choke. I think I would have to put him to sleep. So putting him to sleep is how it went.
Speaker A: So Gordon is somebody who really hates losing.
Speaker C: Yeah, like, he won't even tap in the. In the practice room. I remember, like, I had a toehold a couple times in practice room, and he was just comfortable, like, working there. I'm like. I'm not really putting much on it. I think he just, you know, maybe because of situations like that in practice, he kind of didn't respect my toehold's ability in competition.
Speaker B: You've done that to me in the practice.
Speaker C: I have, yeah. Yeah. I'll give you a little.
Speaker B: Give me a little pop. And then he let go.
Speaker C: That was only 10% right there.
Speaker B: Hey, don't get into math.
Speaker A: Okay? Is there some part of that you think is necessary to be a champion as to, like, this almost unwillingness and competition to tap?
Speaker C: I think there's definitely something to be said for people that are just, like, you know, willing to go that extra mile or to take that damage to secure their. Their victory.
Speaker A: Is there part of you that, like, would hate to tap or hates the tap?
Speaker C: Yeah, I mean, all of me would hate that. Yeah. The whole part of me.
Speaker A: Isn't there a John legend song like that? All of you and all of me.
Speaker B: Very romantic. Yeah.
Speaker A: Yeah, we're sticking on that theme. Okay. I'm sorry. Oh, one of the things Gordon asked, I forget how he put it, because I think there's a lot of words that would need to be censored involved. But he said, ask them how it feels to have a zero five record against me with four submissions combined.
Speaker B: I mean, first of all, I wasn't sure he could count to five. That's an impressive feat.
Speaker A: That's an impressive.
Speaker B: Oh, and five. I mean, I will say one thing. Nobody beats me four times.
Speaker A: I love you so much.
Speaker B: Lex. I did have a question. I did have a question for you. There was some controversy on your twitter about a list of books.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: And I was wondering why Gordon's book wasn't featured amongst that literature.
Speaker A: Well, it was only the first 30 books, or, like, the first 20 books. And it would, of course, be in.
Speaker B: Something interesting about Gordon. He's the first author that's written more books than he's read.
Speaker A: Pretty good if you face him and beat him. What's your take on what it takes to be Gordon? You guys kind of joking? You go pretty hard recently on each other. But as a fan of jiu jitsu, I'm all in on this rivalry. It's just fun to watch.
Speaker B: I mean, first of all, I don't think I go really hard with him. I think Gordon is. He's pretty sensitive. You know what I mean? He's looking for a large insult in a small insult. And for me, like Australians, we just attack each other all day, every day. And for me, like, if I see someone that takes himself very seriously, that's like blood in the water. That's funny. To me. To me, if I can just gently provoke and get a strong reaction, that's hilarious. Like, Aussies, we will just attack each other. And the first person that gets upset, he kind of loses the exchange. So I think that is very, very entertaining.
Speaker A: Like, if you were to beat Gordon, would the mental game off the map be part of it?
Speaker B: I think it would be a factor, for sure. But, I mean, I'm never going to come out too crazy direct with him, you know, like, I don't. I find that, like, if you get too upset online and you're going crazy, I find that I'd be embarrassed to do that myself. Obviously, each. Everyone's different. Everyone has a different style, you know? But, like, yeah, I think mental, the mental aspect would play a big factor. I mean, mainly because if I were to beat him, I would send him a message every day until I died.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Just to gently remind him that I got the last one. The last one is all that matters. We're not giving. We're not giving score.
Speaker A: So, like, once you beat him, you're going to run for the rest of your life.
Speaker B: I mean, run, but look back.
Speaker A: Yeah. With messages into the sunset. Okay. Oh, by the way, you've talked very lightly. You've talked shit very lightly against Alexander Volkanovski's opponent. Very lightly. Have you received death threats or how, how are you still alive?
Speaker B: Like Gordon, I would say people from Dagestan take a joke very well. You know what I mean?
Speaker A: Really? Do they really?
Speaker B: No.
Speaker A: Oh, like Gordon. Oh, sorry, I'm slow. I do aggressive mode in my head.
Speaker B: Listening to you, Islam is pretty cool. I wanted to stir it up a bit, you know? Cause, like, I felt like that was a massive fight and it probably should have had more attention than it was receiving, so I wanted to just gently stir it up a bit. I feel like sambo guys are in the same vein as catch wrestlers. Very sensitive, you know? Like, obviously, there's only three people in the world that do catch wrestling sambo, maybe ten to 15. So I figured we could really provoke them with that sort of jujitsu sambo stuff. Islam took the jokes very well. The russian fans, not so much, are very serious. There's not many smiles in Russia, you know, they didn't take it as well.
Speaker A: I'm trying to suppress the anger. The rage is building up inside me slowly. So you guys mentioned steroids.
Speaker B: I like that you bring that up after we talk about Russia. For the record, smooth segue there.
Speaker A: I did not condone the statements said by the Aussie, but I would love to travel with you to Russia.
Speaker B: That would be a good time. You might get killed with me now.
Speaker A: No, I would be the first to turn to backstab.
Speaker B: You're like, I got in there. Get in.
Speaker A: All right. Are most of the top grapplers on steroids?
Speaker B: I mean, it's hard to say. You know, some people look like shit and they're on steroids. Some people look excellent and they're not on steroids. It's so, so hard to tell.
Speaker A: That seems to be the general consensus that a lot of people on steroids. I'm always a little bit, I don't know. So I'll be honest. I've never, I've never seen anyone take steroids. I've never taken steroids. I don't even know if that's the right term to use or like TRT, any of that. So I'm very careful, like, to not let my naive fite lead me to take conclusions. But I do feel a little bit weird about the witch hunt nature of it. Some people a little bit too eagerly claim that others are on steroids just because they're successful. Um, but at the same time, it does seem that a lot of athletes will do whatever it takes to be successful.
Speaker B: Yeah, I mean, if a sport doesn't test, you got to assume most people are going to do it. And especially now as more money comes into the sport, you got to assume more people are going to do it.
Speaker A: You know, I generally like do AGCC and like, does jiu jitsu test.
Speaker B: It's actually encouraged.
Speaker A: What's encouraged?
Speaker D: Okay.
Speaker A: You get a pamphlet. Okay. They don't test. There's no test.
Speaker B: They test to make sure we're on steroids. Cause obviously it's a big show for the UFC. Fight for us in the future. You don't want anyone coming in out of shape.
Speaker A: Very nice. Do you think using steroids in that kind of context and sports is wrong? Like stepping away if it's not illegal? I mean, do you think, ethically speaking.
Speaker B: I like to assume everyone's on steroids so I don't have to feel bad about using steroids myself.
Speaker A: Yeah. Do you use them? You use all of the steroids?
Speaker B: I'm over 30. It's doctor, you know, that's the medical definition.
Speaker A: That'S the medical. Okay, I'd like to meet your dog.
Speaker B: Therapeutic use, you know?
Speaker A: Therapeutic, right. Like, how do you just feel about it?
Speaker B: I mean, it is cheating for sure whether they test for it or not. I think it is cheating. Obviously. Some people are gonna say, oh, fuck, everyone's on it. I should be able to get away with it. Makes it even playing field, you know? But it kind of becomes russian roulette. Cause it's like if one guy's taking a small amount and the other guy is taking a huge amount, he's gonna reap huge rewards. In the short term. Probably be dead pretty early, but die a champion, mind you. You know what I mean? So it's like, I don't know where that line is. Yeah.
Speaker A: Yeah. What do you think about that? Do you think. Do you think it's worthy to take health risks? I think if you're just for the.
Speaker B: Glory, I think if you're 40, about to die, looking at a cabinet of gold medals for wrestling other men, it's probably not going to hit the same way on your deathbed, you know what?
Speaker A: Sorry, in which direction? Like, is that a good thing or not?
Speaker B: No. You probably gonna feel like, oh, fuck. I probably wasted a bit of health on that, you know?
Speaker A: You think so? Isn't that. Isn't that, like, the glory of it? Like you said, other men?
Speaker D: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker B: Well, I mean, like, you know, maybe wrestle a woman as well?
Speaker A: What'd you do with. With Gabby on Valentine's Day? What, did you take her?
Speaker B: We filmed some new stuff for Onlyfanse.
Speaker A: For onlyfans.
Speaker B: We never stop working.
Speaker A: There's a love affair is also a work affair. Okay. I don't know. I. There's something to that. Me, like. Like Olympic gold medalist accomplishing, like, the heights, sacrificing everything. Just everything. The first 2030 years of your life for this silly little piece of metal. I don't. I think there's something beautiful to that that's, like, inspires a lot. A lot of people. And that's like the height of the human condition in a way.
Speaker B: Like, if you survive, I'm just saying, if you're in your deathbed early in.
Speaker A: Life, we all die. All men die, but not all men truly live.
Speaker B: How many years. How many years are you willing to shave off for a gold medal?
Speaker A: That's a good question. How many. How many are you willing to shave off for a gold medal? Well, you're. For silver medal.
Speaker B: For a silver. I mean, for a silver medal, I'd shave a few off.
Speaker C: I think two silver makes it gold.
Speaker A: It's worth five years.
Speaker B: Five to ten maybe. Yeah. Shave off the bad years, enhance the good ones, you know?
Speaker A: Well, I mean, you've sacrificed, you guys sacrificed a lot, a lot of your life. You continue sacrifice. Oh, you don't, you don't see it as sacrifice?
Speaker C: It's fun. I think training's fun. Being adamant about it, consistent gives you, I mean, we, I think we have a great routine, great ritual. Definitely enjoy the process.
Speaker A: All right, well, do you guys know this is bro science or I'm talking bro scientists. But do you know how long steroids stay in your system?
Speaker C: Forever.
Speaker A: Forever. Oh, because it's like, hey, once you.
Speaker C: Do it, you own it.
Speaker A: Yeah. Just the knowledge. Yeah. All right.
Speaker B: I think it's different for each steroid, right? I think some of them last longer than others. It depends if it's a year.
Speaker A: And you would think I would do a little research before this asking these questions. Why do you think most athletes and coaches don't talk about steroids? Like, why is it such a, like a secret? Why is it so embarrassing?
Speaker C: I think they probably talk about it like, amongst the team and whatnot again, I mean, it's only, it's gonna be more shady if it's like a, your sport is tested or whatnot. We're kind of in the Wild west, in the, in the grappling World, you know?
Speaker A: Yeah. But why don't grapplers talk about it? Because it seems cheating.
Speaker C: I mean, it's kind of insinuated as a bit of cheating even if it's not like, if it's not tested. I mean, still you're, you're taking a person that can, you know, maybe has good jujitsu, good mechanics, you putting them on the leg and they're subbing you with a heel hook versus breaking your leg with a heel hook. You know, something as subtle as that can make, you know, big differences.
Speaker A: All right, this is going to make me sound dumb, but is it possible that steroids are not a huge help in grappling?
Speaker C: I think if you're bad at jujitsu and you do steroids, you can gonna continue to be bad at jiu Jitsu. But if you're great at gear, I'm sorry, if you're great at grappling, if you're great at grappling and then you also do gear, it's gonna enhance what you're already, you know, good at and make you much better.
Speaker A: But, like, how much is the enhancement? I guess is the question.
Speaker C: How much is muscle valued.
Speaker A: Like, if you're question, if you're doing.
Speaker C: Gear and you're not changing weight that much, like maybe it helps you a little bit, but if, you know, you're, you're gaining 50, 60 pounds of pure muscle and it's like, that's a huge enhancement. That's another human.
Speaker A: Does muscle, a small human. Yeah. Does muscle matter in jiu jitsu? I guess is the question, is it possible that it gets in the way?
Speaker C: I say muscle matters, but technique matters more.
Speaker D: I also think that it'll help you develop technique as well because obviously, you know, testosterone helps with recovery rate. So if you're on gear, you're able to train a lot more. Now with that being said, if you're not able to learn, obviously it's not going to help in that aspect. But if you're somebody that knows how to learn and get good at Jiu Jitsu and then you add gear on top of that, you're able to do significantly more sessions throughout the week.
Speaker A: Okay. And by the way, gears, steroids.
Speaker D: Steroids, yeah.
Speaker A: Okay.
Speaker C: I also think that you don't have to be as consistent, uh, in like your sleep and your food and stuff. If you're, if you're on gear, you have a little bit of leeway. Um, but I mean, being consistent and in your diet and your sleep definitely would, would help, you know, the process.
Speaker A: Since you use most steroids of any athlete I've ever met. Do you think steroids help jiu jitsu?
Speaker B: I think obviously it helps recovery and your ability to train more, but I think some, I've seen some guys go on steroids and then suddenly they feel like the incredible hulk. And now in the training room, they start to rely more on strength than the techniques they had. And it actually, in some respect, hinders them and makes them gas more in competition because then they're using more of the muscle they never used to have.
Speaker A: So you've implied that you're a natural athlete.
Speaker B: You said that. He said that skeptically.
Speaker A: Is this something you do for social media to talk shit to Gordon, to imply that he's not a natural athlete?
Speaker C: Well, I only pretty much recently on social media I had this rebuttal, you know, saying that, you know, Gordon's on gear. And I only said that because after, after our match, in our most recent match, the Ebi rules match, he accused me of greasing, which is like lubing up. So I'm slippery during our match, so.
Speaker A: And you did not?
Speaker C: I did not. I was checked multiple times before and after our grappling event, and he still, you know, went out and accused me of this. So I was like, all right, as opposed to telling a lie, I'll just tell the truth about, you know, your steroid use, which it shouldn't be that big of a deal in retrospect. Cause he kind of admitted it and whatnot previously. So it's. Yeah, I just kind of felt like I had to rebuttal, and I didn't do it immediately. Cause I was like, all right, I know I have this podcast planned, so I'll wait to do it on my friend Mark Bell's podcast, you know, be a little more. Get a little bit more exposure on it. And, yeah, I knew he was going to bite the bait, but I didn't think it was going to, you know, bite the baby that hard. I know he's a little stressed out about the comment, but, you know, and.
Speaker A: That was the origin of you guys going back and forth on.
Speaker C: Well, it wasn't so much back and forth. It was just. I went forth, and then he kept going back, back. Like, I remember one. One of my guys dm me, and they were like, gordon's made, like, 68 Instagram stories, and 67 of them were all about you. I was like, all right, well, I'm in his head for sure.
Speaker B: Got us a few followers. We appreciate.
Speaker C: We did get followers. He even shouted out our b team wipeout program.
Speaker A: So.
Speaker C: Thank you.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Okay. Speaking of which, what's the B team? How's it run? And why is it called the B team? Well, I mean, Craig, was the a team. Taken.
Speaker C: I would have been. For me, b's for best.
Speaker D: Okay, best.
Speaker A: All right, what does B stand for? For you, what does it represent? What is the ideal? Like, the, you know, Miyamoto Musashi philosophical foundation of B team.
Speaker B: Aim low and achieve.
Speaker A: If the bar is set low, you can't help but win. Okay?
Speaker B: That's Nikki's philosophy with women as well. Set the bar incredibly low. Overachieve.
Speaker A: So what. What is the b team? How do you guys run it? Like, what? Yeah, I mean, can you just talk about the school, how you found it? What? What? What is it? What's it like?
Speaker B: I mean, pretty much just a regular jujitsu gym. We started as sort of a pros, only purple bone above team. And we have me, Nikki Rod, Nikki Ryan, Ethan, Damian. As coaches. Am I missing someone?
Speaker A: Oh, JB, your memory with your old age.
Speaker B: Impeccable memory. Yeah. And we got JB coming on to teach white belts, but just your stock standard. Jiu jitsu team, we focus on more. We lean heavily towards the professional athlete side of things. We have a lot of high level guys in there. Class structure, regular instruction, positional sparring, open rounds. But we sort of took a. A heavy slant on marketing side of things. We really try to blow up the YouTube channel, obviously, we sell a lot of clothing, merchandise and stuff, so, yeah, we just sort of took a modern approach to a standard jiu jitsu gym because, I mean, jujitsu gyms are full of some of the most boring human beings on earth. So we try to highlight strong words.
Speaker A: Craig jones.
Speaker B: Strong words highlight the other side of things. You know, keep it pretty light.
Speaker D: Heart.
Speaker A: It can be fun.
Speaker B: Yeah, that jujitsu can be fun. I guess that it could be cool, too, you know, it's not just full of steroid it up autistic people, you know?
Speaker A: Question from Reddit. Quote, need to hear some of the stories about drop ins that led to the making of the gem of a video, the do'S and doN'ts of training a b team. Any. Any fun stories, anyone that stands out. Do you guys remember any police involved ever?
Speaker B: We had a guy coming. We had to kick him out. He was stalking two of the members. Yeah, well, I mean, that's just crazy people, you know? Like, I portray a pretty insane image online, and I guess I am that a lot of the time, but at training, try to keep it. While training, around training, I'm insulting everyone, but while training, I try to keep it pretty serious. But obviously, the image I portray lures in some of the crazier members.
Speaker A: I mean, like, the thing is about the. The Jimmy guys run is. Is really professional. It's, like, friendly. It's like the light hearted joking is there, obviously, this, you know, like, shit talk and all that kind of stuff. But, like, it's. It's a pretty safe environment. Yes, but the public Persona might attract some.
Speaker B: Some maniacs. I won't say which places I've trained at, but obviously, some places, you walk into the room and it's very, very serious. Yeah, there's no smiles around, obviously. It's probably average training room in Russia, but no smiles. Very serious environment, you know what I mean? And I definitely don't like that. I don't want to show up to training and be walking on eggshells, not know what the coaches mood's like that day. I want to go and have a good time. Keep it lighthearted.
Speaker A: What was in the video? What are the do's and don'ts? Because, like, the address is public. Like, anyone can show up.
Speaker B: Anyone can show up. Yeah. What would the do's and don't?
Speaker A: Does anyone challenge you, like, to a fight?
Speaker B: Not, yeah, not yet. I mean, probably from other gyms in town. They probably, that's probably coming down the line. But do's and don'ts, I'm all in on that.
Speaker A: I would be excited as a fan to just watch.
Speaker B: I love the drama.
Speaker A: Not the drama. No. Well, a little drama, a little drop of poison is good, but ultimately it's the best grapplers in the world kind of going at it. Yeah. That's fun. Because I, maybe I'm wrong, but I think there is an underlying deep camaraderie at the end of the day, when you're at the top of the world and you're in the same town, what.
Speaker B: Could possibly go wrong?
Speaker A: It's like a shitty western, but like an epic western where like, Clint Eastwood, like the good, the bad and ugly, of course. I love it. I'm here just eating popcorn like that.
Speaker B: Stare in the pot.
Speaker A: I'm not staring the pot. I'm not staring the pot.
Speaker B: These questions were from Reddit.
Speaker A: That one for sure.
Speaker B: Yeah. I mean, what could possibly go wrong if you're the world's best grappler hates you and you're gently provoking him behind the scenes every day?
Speaker A: Well, I mean, for sure in Texas.
Speaker B: And you've stolen his brother, held him for ransom, kidnapped.
Speaker A: It is like a story of a shitty western. I think you now allow white belts to train with you. What's it like to open it up to a bigger audience?
Speaker B: We haven't opened it up yet, but it'll be interesting to see. I mean, I feel like your higher belts, they really understand what the training room is, you know what I mean? White belts early, they're trying to find their place in the gym. Could be kind of awkward and stuff in that environment. So I think obviously those white belts coming in will change the dynamic, but the white belts will have a separate white belt classes, obviously for them, because given it's such a high level gym, it'd be tough for a beginner to be able to enter the more advanced classes. Obviously we're teaching more advanced techniques. So, yeah, we've separated a wide belt program, I believe. 06:00 p.m. monday to Friday. Yeah, maybe we'll have a Saturday one as well. But it'll be interesting to see how it goes. We're trying to do things different, you know, like trying to do your traditional jiu jitsu gyms. Obviously, you're not going to teach beginners wrestling at all. We're trying to split it at least 33% top game, bottom game, and wrestling. So at least create more well rounded athletes from day one. Whereas I feel like most traditional jiu jitsu gyms might have no, gee, once a week. That'll touch wrestling. Very ibjef heavy techniques. But again, the sports changing for sure.
Speaker A: Just to take that on, how does a beginner get good at jujitsu? Like, given that you're starting this web. But what's your philosophy on that?
Speaker B: Obviously, buy all of my instructionals at full price.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Not during a sale.
Speaker A: Okay.
Speaker B: That would go a long way.
Speaker A: For those of you who are Russians. I'll give you, I'll send you instructions or all the forms so you know how to, how to steal it. Yeah, just, I bought them all, so I'll just send it to you for.
Speaker B: We do, I mean, we do have the Mackerchief 50 discount code, you know.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Offering discounts to help him out for the rematch.
Speaker A: I got the. Nice, okay, well, I got 100% discount for you if you need it. But that said, you're instructional are both hilarious and brilliant. And it's one of the most respected instructionals out there with incredibly great names.
Speaker B: Yeah, it probably loses me sales, honestly, due to removing the seriousness of the.
Speaker A: Cause, they think it's gonna kind of suck. It's gonna be some funny, gimmicky thing.
Speaker B: Or, I mean, some people don't even know if it's a real product. That's a big hurdle I have to overcome is they see it and they're like, is that a real thing? That's a problem. But how does the white bell get good? I think they just, I mean, just have to show up, just have to put in the effort, try to focus on using techniques and training rather than just fighting to the death, you know? Although that is entertaining for us to watch two white belts fight it to death.
Speaker A: Yeah, but what are the techniques you should focus on? Like, what's the process? What does it mean to show up? Like how much drilling, all that kind of stuff. Like what it, what if you were to optimize the first six months of a, of a beginner? There's a lot of people who listen to this and haven't tried. They've been curious. I have a lot of friends who haven't, who are like jujitsu curious. They're constantly looking for an excuse to start.
Speaker B: I think it's just gotta be as simple as possible, you know? Like, we shouldn't be teaching more advanced movements. I mean, obviously, in the grand scheme of things, there's highly advanced techniques, and then there's slightly advanced. And I think trying to teach those guys real specific positions, even, like, real specific types of guards, is just beyond them. I think the best way to learn is through problem solving. And I think if you show the technique before they've discovered that problem, the learning is sort of held back. So I like the idea of using kids style games to show them a problem and then use the techniques to fix the problems they've just discovered. I think that's the best way to learn.
Speaker A: Can you give an example of a problem to show them before you give them the techniques? Like, what are we talking about?
Speaker B: So, say you wanted to teach posture in wrestling, you could create a game where one guy, the game might be get to a leg or get to two legs, control the leg. Like super simple, but the rules, the constraint would be one guy is forced to keep upright posture, and one guy is forced. Well, not forced, but he's allowed to keep a bent at the hips, lower posture, and obviously, within that constraint, the guy with the better posture is going to have more success. He's gonna have a better posture to secure a leg or secure both legs. And therefore, you've demonstrated the flaws of bad posture without having to explain it to him before they really tested that out.
Speaker A: Okay. And then the result of that, you would realize that the bent over posture is better.
Speaker B: Yeah, you have that aha moment rather than just being. Having it spoken to you.
Speaker A: You wrote, craig, I'm a big fan of constraint based learning, I guess, is what you're talking about. I love presenting beginners with a problem before the solution, like here. Attempt to hold side control with no. With no cues on how. Then I see how the guy got out and addressed issue by issue, cross face and hip control and so on. Okay, so what are some other examples? Like side control?
Speaker B: Yeah, that would be excellent. One side control, like teacher like, obviously, we say, oh, you secure a crossface so they can't turn into you. Much easier to have them try to hold someone down without explaining what a cross face is, and then use that technique to address the problem they've just encountered. So I think you could do that with a lot of areas of jiu jitsu, like even more advanced, say 50 50. Obviously, a mirrored position where you both have access to each other's heels. Most people will stall out of that position and keep their feet crossed. I think a great constraint for both of them. You can't cross your feet. Now you have to learn how to slip the heel hook when they expose it and how to safely re attack of your own. So the constraint is you can't be too defensive in that position. And I think the rate of learning increases.
Speaker A: Why do you think the rate of learning increases? Like, why do you think that works?
Speaker B: Because you encounter more problems, say, in that situation, they're going to get you heal a lot more in whatever period of time you allocate the drill for than if the legs are crossed. I don't think the hard part splitting the legs to get to the submission. I think the hard part's practicing control while they're trying to slip it at a later stage. And then obviously trying to slip your heel when you're in more danger also makes you more comfortable in that bad position if you're used to doing it with open legs.
Speaker A: Yeah, I think that probably that style of teaching forces people to focus on. This is so easy to fall into. FocusInG on, like, memorizing a particular details of a technique without thinking, like, why the hell does this even work? And if you don't have that, you could get to focus on, like, from, like, as cliche as it sounds from first principles. Like, why the hell, how the hell did I get out of this? Like, why does this even work? Why does wrestling work? Why do you have a bent over posture? You get those, like, start to ask those kinds of questions, which is kind of interesting, because it's not obvious to me that bent over posture is the right posture for jujitsu. Right. I'm confused, actually, about that. I don't know about the correct posture. Yeah. For Jiu Jitsu. Like, what's the right answer?
Speaker B: I think bent over posture is still.
Speaker A: Good for jiu jitsu, even with the Judo and all that. Like, why are so many jujitsu people, like, at a high level, the posture is higher up?
Speaker C: Well, I think the. I think wrestling posture is just a bit too low because it's not necessary. Right. If wrestlers are, like, low enough to the ground where your hands could touch the Mat. But in Jujitsu, you know, it's a, it's kind of a mix between, like, WrEstling and, like, Judo or, or GrEco ROman wresTling. So I think it's just a bit more. More lax then it's, it's bent over, but it's not upright, and it's also not super low.
Speaker B: Bit more room for error, too, because obviously the Jujitsu guy shot isn't going to be as athletic or as quick as a wrestler, especially wrestler with shoes.
Speaker A: So it actually comes down to the fact that JuJitsu people, just on Average, even at the top level, are not good at shooting.
Speaker B: I think so, yeah. I think obviously, I mean, all the wrestlers in american stuff, they're STArting super early, super young, you know what I mean? They've. By the time they get to the same age, we are really in our sport and stuff, they've spent much longer doing the actual sport and the average jujitsu guy.
Speaker A: And then there's another level of wrestling, of course, with the soviet bloc, that just was unachievable for your guy.
Speaker B: Who you. An australian rugby. Yeah, a former rugby player.
Speaker A: Rugby, is that kind of like american football but much less money? Is that what that.
Speaker B: Much less money. Much tougher, I would say. But who knew that the cure to the dagestani wrestling were the Aussies?
Speaker A: Were the Aussies. Okay, let's go there. Your friend, your training partner, Alexander Volkanovsky, you helped him prepare for the Islam Makachev versus Volkanovsky fight. Who do you think, first of all, won that fight?
Speaker B: But that's a tricky one.
Speaker A: How is that the tricky question?
Speaker B: I will say when.
Speaker A: When all the shit talk you've been doing, how is that the tricky question?
Speaker B: When I was in the corner going into the fifth, I personally believed live that Volkanovski probably needed a finish to take the victory.
Speaker A: But you have to think that way, right? In general or you, like, legitimately, it's.
Speaker B: A great area because the judging, who knows? Plus, I was like, wait, we're in Australia. Where's this bias? You know, we've got some australian judges here. I was really hoping we get a bit of bias on that. Unfortunately not. Hopefully they lose their jobs. But again, yeah, it was, it was a close fight. I think sometimes you're blinded in the moment because again, everyone counted Volkanovski out, the crowds behind him, so everything he does going to get a huge cheer. You bias towards the smaller guy, you bias towards the underdog. So you sort of. Whatever the underdog does has a bigger impact in your mind. And sometimes that can bias as the fight goes along. But, yeah, super, super close fire. I would really love them to have a rematch, but obviously that's going to hold up both divisions, so I don't know if they'll be able to do it.
Speaker A: Do you think they'll do a rematch soon? I mean, that wasn't. That was an epic fight. I was listening to the fight companion during.
Speaker B: They all thought so.
Speaker A: They biased strongly. The opinion.
Speaker B: Round two is the. The tricky one?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Round two is the tricky one.
Speaker A: Anyway. I'd love to see that, like, run it back and do three, actually. This is an epic fight. What was the brief conversation you had with Islam Makhachev and his team?
Speaker B: I didn't know how we take the joke because obviously Khabib tried to flying Eagle kick Dylan Dannis in the face. So I wasn't sure how my humor would go. But, I mean, Dylan must have said some worse things to me. I was just playing around. I mean, you can't really take anything I say serious. Come across like an idiot, but. So when he was coming up to me afterwards, I was like, oh, I don't know why he's gonna say. And again, he. Maybe he would have been more upset if he had lost, but he just received the judge's decision. Yeah, but he came up. I went to check his hand. He gave me a big hug and then pretended to throw me. And then I thought the interaction was over, and then he circled back. So that's why I was so awkward. I was like, he's coming back. He wants to say. He wants to. He wants something else. But he just said, why didn't you teach your boy how to escape the body triangle?
Speaker A: Oh, wow. Interesting. What did you say to that?
Speaker B: I said, well, I mean, obviously you've got to learn how to finish a rear naked show.
Speaker A: Is that what you said?
Speaker B: No, I didn't say I was laughing. But then they ushered us out. They were like, get out of here before the Aussie crowd attacks.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: You know, what do you think about.
Speaker A: The body triangle position they were in? It seemed like, for the first time, it seems almost like Volk was dominant in that position, which is kind of weird.
Speaker B: I mean, damage is meant to trump control MMA judging. Damage is the number one.
Speaker A: Do you think the judges saw that? What did they score, that athlete?
Speaker B: I think they all scored four towards Islam, three and five. Two of the judges scored towards Volks. One of the judges scored three for Islam, one of the. It was 49 46 for one of them, and the other ones were 48 47. I think, again, the confusing round was round two. I don't think anyone scored the body triangle round for Volks, which I wish they had.
Speaker A: Volkanovski was and is still, arguably, pound for pong, greatest fighter in the world. How long have you known him?
Speaker B: I don't know. The first time I met him before he was in the UFC when I used to live in Melbourne. He came down to train at Absolut, and then we really connected on Ultimate Fighter. One of his guys he was going to bring to ultimate fighter, Brad Riddell, pulled out last second. So he called me when I was in Puerto Rico, and he's like, do you want to coach on tough for five weeks? And like I said, puerto Rico was apocalypse now. I was like, yeah, get me out of here. So I took, jumped on that opportunity, and we were in Vegas five weeks together. Cause he was meant to fight Ortega, and then he got hit with COVID real bad, got stuck in. I think he was in hospital for maybe one to two weeks. And then before he flew back to Australia, they were like, all right, maybe we just do you guys as the ultimate fighter coaches. So I jumped on board with that, and that's really when we've become close. Obviously, I was useful in the Ortega fight, helped him get out of submissions. He fought then korean zombie Max Holloway. I basically just held the bucket at that point in the corner, a couple striking fights, and then again, yeah, we had to tackle the Islam problem. So I did spend five to six weeks down there preparing for that.
Speaker A: How did you tackle the Islam problem? How did I tackle was you, somebody who barely knows anything about wrestling, having.
Speaker B: To, obviously doesn't take much, you know, especially russian wrestling.
Speaker A: Did the beard help or like what? Like, in all seriousness, what were some of the key ideas that you worked on with Volkanovski to prepare for it?
Speaker B: I had the help of Frank Hickman. Hickman was down there, too, one of the Hickman brothers wrestling coach. So we were sort of like problem solving. And I mean, basically we were confident in Volks fence wrestling. His cage work, he's super good on the cage, super like under respected in that position. And we knew that if you were able to take the scrambles to the cage, he would be effective against Islam. Because again, Islam is background in sambo freestyle wrestling. But I mean, honestly, he's probably got the same experience on the cages. Volks, obviously, some of those wrestling skills will translate very well to the cage, but the cage is still somewhat of a gray area and equalizer. And Volks, again, incredible ability to stand up, incredible defense on the cage, which you saw, we worked on strategies to get up, and a ton of submission defense. Islam loves Kimura's, obviously, rear naked from the back armbars. Those are sort of an arm triangles, dominant submissions. But again, the guys he submitted, not grapplers, apart from Charles Oliveira. And again, Charles Oliver was basically knocked out at that point. So it was still impressive he submitted him. But again, I always told people this, they thought it was crazy I was like Charles Olivera versus Islam in a grappling match. Oliveira is going to win that match like submission grappling. Submission, grappling, yeah. So in a pure grappling skill set, I think Oliveira is a more dangerous grappler. So we didn't even come into it thinking Islam was this unstoppable boogeyman that people make him out to be. So we approached her from that, just focused on the techniques, ability to get back up, using turtle to get back up, using turtle to scoot to the cage to get back up. And hand fighting from there, keeping it pretty safe. But what makes volks so special, I think, is his gas tank. Gas tank and his willpower. He's just unbreakable. The Dagestani guys, Khabib Islam, they are good at submissions, but they break guys mentally and they fatigue him. And then they take the submission that's offered. Olivera is a guy that can jump on submissions and have an incredible technical ability to finish those submissions, whether you're fresh or you're tired. And then you combine that with Volkanovski, who incredible willpower, never gets tired. You're never going to break him. And as you saw, he only attempted one submission the whole fight.
Speaker A: Is that learned? Is that trained or are you just born with that, that mental toughness?
Speaker B: It's a good question. I mean, he's like an anomaly, like the entire fight camp. Not nervous at all, supremely confident the whole fight week, completely confident. He just has an attitude like, oh, everyone cast me out. We'll see. You know what I mean? Islam, he's like, let's see.
Speaker A: No doubt.
Speaker B: No doubt at all. Super relaxed up until about five minutes before, and then he starts stamping himself up. He's like, you are not taking this belt from my family. He gets into that sort of mindset.
Speaker A: He actually says that out loud.
Speaker B: You can't teach that survival. He didn't even take a fight, you know?
Speaker A: Have you guys ever been like, pushed to the limit like that or broken in a grappling match?
Speaker C: I'll do it in practice. Like, I'll push myself to, like, I don't know, I think it might pass out or die or something. Like, as far as, like, how tired you get, you know, because like, in a match, they try not to ever.
Speaker A: Get close to that in the match.
Speaker C: Yeah, you try to, because, you know, it's important to understand where your exhausted exhaustion point is. But, yeah, if you have to push to that limit a match, you probably do doing something wrong, you know, like, if you like, you see in matches where guys sprint the last, like, minute, they try to win the match the last minute, and it's like, you definitely had some mistakes leading up to that. If you have to, you know, kind of go balls the wall.
Speaker A: Okay. But has there been ever times in competition, especially, like, early on, because you're like, you wrestled pretty hard and wrestling is pretty exhausting. Like, not wrestling, but, you know, wrestling style kind of thing, going against the best people in the world?
Speaker C: Yeah, I mean, I definitely. Again, I think. I think in practice, it's important to do that hard work that where competition is much easier. You know, I think if you. If you redline in practice and you really push through, like, death's door, then once you're in competition and you're working with, you know, you're being fresh in a comp. I mean, it's. It's much better.
Speaker A: Have you ever been to that thing where Dan Gable talks about always wanting to be to a place where you can't get off the mat? Like, you work so hard in the training room, you can't get off the mat? I think he says he's failed at that in his career. He was always able to at least crawl off the mat.
Speaker C: Yeah, I definitely never, like, actually died on the map. I felt like. I felt like I was going to die, you know?
Speaker A: What about you? Do you quit all the time?
Speaker B: I get a lot cramped. I'm like, you know what? You got me, Matt. Let's do this against mine, dude.
Speaker C: If I'm asking Craig for a role, he's in the bathroom somewhere.
Speaker A: Do you see the value of pushing yourself to that place where you're knocking on death's door?
Speaker B: Yeah, but within safety, you know? Cause obviously, the most serious injuries occur when you're tired over training and stuff like that. So I think, like, taking a page out of what those MMA fighters do, especially Volkswagen training. Like, he's not necessarily pushing crazy in each round, but he's doing extra conditioning, assault bike stuff, crazy workouts outside. And he does do some crazy training workouts, but all safe, very safe. Like, when he's redlining like that in the training room, it's a very controlled, safe setting. I think, to do that in jiu jitsu against some of these lunatics out there that are trying to kill you, especially when you have a name, can be dangerous.
Speaker A: So your approach to just is, don't warm up and don't try too hard.
Speaker B: No, sir.
Speaker A: For safety. No, for safety, though.
Speaker B: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker A: Longevity, you know, and talk shit about Russians. I got it. I got it. I hear you. Oh, you mentioned cage work. What's interesting to you that you've learned over all this time about cage work? What's interesting about the dynamics of that? Are you talking about both? Like the control in the dominant position, but also getting up from the bottom while you're against the cage, all of.
Speaker B: That, the added dimension of that cage, that wall being there changes a lot of stuff. Right. So obviously, in some ways, it's a much lower impact wrestling style because you can't be sprawled on. You can shoot. The cage is going to block their feet. You're going to be able to chase down their hips. It's just a completely different fight. And again, because of Islam's judo skills, that upper body controls, you see, he's able to use against the cage, like the inside trips, sort of the uchi mada style hirai go. She throws. So obviously those skills do translate. But, yeah, I think the cage is a great equalizer for a lot of things, like athleticism and stuff. It takes away a huge speed advantage aspect of the fight.
Speaker A: So he's really good at standing up. What is there? I assume he learned all that from you and your instructional just stand up.
Speaker B: I mean, we were so confident. I was like, you know what? Why don't we put this thing out a month before the fight? Yeah, maybe the illegal download hasn't made its way to Russia yet. Yeah, but it was there for him.
Speaker A: Can you, can you explain to me what's in the instructional? Just stand up. Like what, what are the, what are the ideas?
Speaker B: What do you, I mean, the old school way to stand up. People talk about the technical get up, you know, the old Gracie put the hand, but I mean, that's, that doesn't work. Hasn't worked for 20 years. You know, if you look at everyone that gets up in MMA, they're using turtle to get up and up. They're using wrestling to get up, you know what I mean? Which is counter to what pure jiu jitsu says. They say don't expose the back. Don't ever expose your back. I think jujitsu is a terrible way to get back to the feet because if you were to retain guard and go half guard or close guard super hard positions to get up, you're basically putting yourself in a leg turk for wrestling. So I think you need to borrow from wrestling to learn how to get up in an MMA fight. So basically how to safely expose your own back while not allowing them to get hooks and use that to get back up. Or at least not allow them to get two hooks.
Speaker A: And that applies for MMA, especially for.
Speaker B: MMA, especially because obviously striking is a factor. But if they are striking, they don't have locked hands around your body, means you are able to move. You are able to make an attempt to get back up. They have to choose between control, submission, or strike.
Speaker A: Post from Reddit. Why does Craig Jones push so hard for a bottom is bad jiu jitsu. What is so bad about playing bottom guard, such as half guard or Delahiva? Those are the two options.
Speaker B: No one likes the bottom.
Speaker A: Why would I want to get up? It's the question for all of you. Is the bottom a bad place to be?
Speaker B: I mean, the bottom's bad if you don't want that guy on top of you. That's the way I look at it.
Speaker A: You know, that's, that sounds like something a cowboy would say, but I don't know if there's much meaning. I think the point of Jiu Jitsu is both. Both are dangerous. Being on bottom and on top.
Speaker C: I think the longer the match is, probably favors the top guy more just because every movement the bottom guy makes is probably carrying your weight, carrying that gravity on top of you. So I think it's a bit more efficient passing from the top as opposed to sweeping from bottom.
Speaker B: Bottoms reactive. Top is active. The top player decides how to engage, how to approach the guard. They can use angles, they can use footwork. They can throw, people throw the legs by. So it's an active position. Bottoms reactive. Reactive. You're going to get fatigued.
Speaker D: Yeah, I think, I think it's very difficult to gas somebody out while playing guard, but I think it's very easy to gas somebody out when attempting to pass it.
Speaker A: Well, you guys are talking about gassing people out, but is there more dangers from the bottom, like in terms of submissions and all that kind of stuff or.
Speaker C: No, I'm back and forth because I'm a top. I'm a top player, but I understand the value of, of being on bottom. Like when I do play guard bottom, I feel like the submission, the submissions come much easier. And when I'm on top, they come also pretty easy. But maybe I just take a different route.
Speaker B: Top on the streets, but I'm in the shades.
Speaker A: What was the hardest part of the training for the training camp for Volkanovski? Like, you're just experiencing world class MMA fighters training and giving your approach of to jiu jitsu of not trying too hard and no matter what.
Speaker B: Yeah. I mean, from my perspective, there's a lot of pressure for that, you know, like that's a, that's, that's a lot of pressure for me to go in and think that I could possibly figure out a way to help this Guy address this guy that's basically never been beaten. I think he got knocked out once, but basically not really even been put in bad positions, you know what I mean? That's a lot of pressure on me, especially Volkanovski is such a great guy. Jiu jitsu is different, you know, like, you coach a guy, he loses, he has time to tap, but in MMA could get severely hurt. There's a lot more weight in what you need to do as a coach. You have a greater sense of responsibility to their health and wellbeing, you know, like, obviously, I know Fox kids, I know his wife. You know what I mean? They're putting faith in you to not just win the fight, but keep this man safe, you know? So from my perspective, a hell of a lot more pressure coaching him as an MMA fighter.
Speaker A: So almost like the psychological aspect of, like, of doing the best you can for him.
Speaker B: Exactly. Yep, yep.
Speaker A: What was hardest about the actual training? Was it the technical aspect of trying to figure out the puzzle of Islam, or was it like being a good training partner, like in figuring out how the grappling would work, basically playing your best impression of Makachev, were you trying to actually impersonate him, like, not just visually, but like in style?
Speaker B: Yeah, definitely, definitely.
Speaker A: Visually, you're not as good looking, but go ahead, a little taller.
Speaker B: But in terms of the training, yeah, I mean, Islam is known as incredibly strong guys. Obviously, I'm heavier than Islam, so theoretically I should be able to replicate that strength difference. And then in terms of grappling, targeting those submissions that Islam does, like focusing on those in the training room, focusing on the way he holds half guard and really in the grappling sense, trying to replicate him on the ground. And then, yeah, I wrestled with him on the wall a ton, trying to replicate, obviously, to the best of my ability, a lot of the stuff he does on the wall, body lock heavy inside trip Uchi martyrs and just constantly putting the work on volks, you know what I mean? Like constantly chaining attacks against him, really.
Speaker A: Replicate as he's trying to get up and escape and all that kind of stuff. So this submission, like both judo and submissions, just attack and attack.
Speaker B: Exactly. There's only so much you can do, really, because obviously he's been, I think he's, he's been fighting a long time. So it's like you're trying to polish what he already is good at. You can't just completely create entirely new game for him in the space of six weeks. So you're trying to take what he's already effective at, add to it. And luckily, a lot of the stuff he's already very good at was easy to add to for the for the.
Speaker A: Fight question from Reddit. I'm very curious why other MMA fighters don't employ high profile grapplers from b team and new wave to improve their grappling. That's from this sub. By now, it's clear that they are levels above almost everyone in MMA, simply because fighters there don't specialize in grappling. But it doesn't seem like fighters, even champions, get training partners from the most successful teams. Why is that the case? From your experience, why doesn't Khabib call you?
Speaker B: You might now put in a good word for me.
Speaker A: Oh, I will.
Speaker B: That's right. He takes a joke pretty well.
Speaker A: Yeah, no, you'll be walking with open arms.
Speaker B: I think your average Jiu jitsu coach MMA fighters have bad experience with Jiu Jitsu. Guys, Jiu jitsu doesn't have a massive place in MMA, obviously, rounds, stand ups, it's hard, hard to submit people. Your average brazilian jiu jitsu black belt, doesn't know anything about holding a guy down, doesn't know anything about how to stand up. So I think if you over overly utilize that jujitsu guy that hasn't had experience in more modern, no gee, or training MMA fighters previously, it's going to be a complete waste of time to them. I think they're smart enough to realize that.
Speaker A: Do you have, and do you guys, do you have interest in MMA at all? Just not even like, well, certainly just competing yourself, but like, just understanding the puzzle of MMA.
Speaker C: Yeah, I mean, I've been a fan of mixed martial arts, you know, for a very long time before I, I trained jits personally. Personally, I'd much rather coach than fight, but I mean, I'd fight somebody for, you know, a good check and I get to pick the opponent and have a proper camp.
Speaker A: Okay.
Speaker B: I could think of a good at.
Speaker A: Who's that? All right, who do you think is the greatest MMA fighter of all time? Craig can start with you. Just as a fan of the sport, as somebody who's been deep in it.
Speaker B: I mean, from my perspective, after that performance, I'm going to say Volkanovski, because he was able to decisively out strike Max Holloway, one of the greatest strikers in the sport, and he was able to hang with the wrestler of Islam, Akashev. And in terms of. Ortega was able to survive. Ortega, who has some of the most dangerous submissions in jiu jitsu. So I think in my opinion, technically he's the best.
Speaker A: So even though. Even though he technically lost, he still, he still has a crown.
Speaker B: I believe given the size difference, given he's moving up in weight, I think.
Speaker A: All those factors really, the underdog, everything, the pressure.
Speaker B: Did you think he would be able to hang in any of the wrestling exchanges with his and.
Speaker A: No, no, no. I was really surprised. That's why in my eyes, like, it's kind of funny, like winning. At the end of the day, I feel like judges influenced that. Although I did think australian judges would rob the other way, but I was assuming they kind of somebody paid somebody and not enough maybe. But in general, I just thought he won sort of in the eyes of what martial arts stands for, like sort of going to the fire and survive and thrive and finish the last round strong, which is kind of like, spiritually is what a victory is. So I wish we kept going, like, one more round. Yeah, exactly, that kind of thing. What about you? What do you think? Like, who are the fighters you admire? Like, who do you think is the greatest of all time?
Speaker C: I think the fighter I paid most attention to was Jon Jones. You know, he has a great ability just to mix the high level striking, high level grappling, although his, you know, jiu jitsu by itself isn't, you know, probably isn't like, you know, super high level, but his ability to mix everything together, I would say he's, he's the best and he's a fellow, you know, heavier guy, heavyweight now. So it's, it's nice to see, you know, how those guys move at that.
Speaker A: Weight and a fellow natural athlete. See what I did there? All right, what about you, Nikki?
Speaker D: Yeah, if I had to pick, pick a goat, I would probably have to say Khabib, just because he was undefeated and he had a very high finishing rate. Very few of his fights actually went to a decision. So overall, he dominated almost every single opponent he went against.
Speaker A: The dominance, we've been joking about it, but, Craig, what do you think makes the dagestani fighter so good? From this small region of the world, so much dominance has come.
Speaker B: I mean, obviously the amount of freestyle wrestling champions from that region probably puts their wrestling above and beyond the best in all of MMA. And obviously a lot of, even in the Olympics, a lot of champions out of there. Right. So I think that skillset combines with them, adding effective pin controls on the ground and jiu jitsu submissions. But again, I think it's that hard training those guys like Khabib would maintain that pressure throughout the entire fight and break guys down. Their ability to fatigue guys to a breaking point, I think, is something they do best.
Speaker A: I wonder what, what that is, is that technique, what is that? What is it about their upbringing? Because it's that just that part of the world over. The Satyr brothers with, on the freestyle wrestling side, to all the mixed martial arts people like, it must be part of the, the culture also. They must be doing something. I don't think, I've never, I haven't seen a convincing explanation of why yet of what's specific about their training, what's specific about their culture that creates that. Okay, what do you think about like the flip side? Do you admire somebody like Conor McGregor who knows how to create a spectacle? You, Craig, who likes spectacles?
Speaker B: Spectacles, yeah, I mean, I really admire I early Conor McGregor. Cause I found him absolutely hilarious. You know, like, I felt like that was peak banter. I feel like he just took the american world by storm. Aussies, British, Irish, Kiwis. I believe we have a way better level of banter and attacking each other. And it's almost too easy to pick on Americans that take themselves very seriously. I mean, I could believe in other parts of the world, too, the far east of Europe, you know, but that's.
Speaker A: The, that's the tricky thing with Conor. I, he was, I feel like you could have gotten in the same kind of trouble because the Russians really took everything very seriously. They weren't joking around.
Speaker B: Yeah, that's, that's the problem. It's like, it's, it's, it's a bit of. I mean, some things he definitely takes too far, you know, but I felt like early on, he had the right balance where he wouldn't really cross the line, but he would do, he would do enough. He just took it to another level, obviously, later in his career, but I think early on, a bit of innocent banter.
Speaker A: He gets a lot of eyes on the sport, though. He's probably by far the most popular combat athlete of all time because of that. Yeah, I feel like you have to cross the line. I don't think enough people appreciate the values he's brought by crossing the line.
Speaker B: He's making a sacrifice crossing the line that's going to affect him for the rest of his life. You know, I see.
Speaker A: I don't think so I think you can always walk back because I think unlike people might disagree with this. I, well, yeah, I thought he always radiated a respect for the opponent, like afterwards, and underneath it, it felt like the same way you do it. When I hear you shit talking, I don't see a person who really means it. I see a person who's having fun with it. I always saw Conor McGregor the same way. I don't know, but people took it, like, extremely seriously. But I saw the respect, like the common respect the martial artists have for each other that felt like it was.
Speaker B: If you don't like that individual, you're gonna perceive what they say more negatively than if you obviously were. So I feel like if you like someone, you're gonna never think they really cross the line.
Speaker A: That's true. So you're saying I like you? That's my perceiving you're bullshit. In a positive light. Are there people that hate you?
Speaker B: You get, I mean, some of the family members are just table.
Speaker A: As far as students, people that really get to know you all, I hate you.
Speaker B: The fans love me, the friends hate me.
Speaker A: It's a good place to be. Keep your enemies close. All right. What do you think is the most important muscle for just as a biceps?
Speaker C: Oh, I think a strong thing, a strong back. I think back one core second and then biceps.
Speaker A: Okay. Biceps. Cool. Do you legitimately think, like, weightlifting helps jiu jitsu? It's kind of, the discussion on the steroids is like the muscle mass and strength and power and explosiveness, all that.
Speaker C: I think sometimes when we're at that upper echelon of competition, there's only, there's like, little minute battles that you have to win. And if you're, if you're relatively close in technique, then a lot of times a stronger opponent pulls it out.
Speaker A: But it could be also just a limitation. Right. You hold position too long. What about for hobbyists? Do you recommend weightlifting? Like, when you see people in the gym?
Speaker C: I always recommend weightlifting. I almost see muscle as the body's armor.
Speaker B: Right.
Speaker C: The, the more armor you have, the more damage you could kind of take and, you know, maybe recovery is a little bit better. Um, and I've always seen weightlifting as it means to, uh, stick to my routine. Like, if there's no point in lifting if you're not eating right and you're not sleeping right. So if you kind of put it all together, then it's, it's beneficial.
Speaker A: What about you guys? You go, do you go to the gym?
Speaker B: I go to the gym, yeah.
Speaker A: Leave it on an elliptical and that butt machine or.
Speaker B: Yeah, I focus on the glutes heavily.
Speaker A: All right, what about, like, what about injury prevention and so on? How do you train to minimize the risk of injury? You guys have all been pretty beat up. You've gotten a major injury with the ACL.
Speaker D: Yeah.
Speaker A: So how do you train to minimize injury?
Speaker B: Probably not the right guy to ask.
Speaker A: Can you talk through your injury? Like, what happened to.
Speaker D: Yeah. So about one week prior to this last ADCC, I was wrestling with this guy named Kenta who was also competing, and I went to go lift him from, like, a rear body lock, and he hooked the outside of my leg, and we just felt something pop. You know, he felt a shift with his. With his leg. And when it first happened, it hurt for, like, the first 30 seconds. And then I honestly debated. I was like, maybe it was just, you know, some freak thing. I was like, I literally thought about continuing the session. Uh, then the next day, I woke up, and it was, like, super sore. I was, you know, limping around, couldn't. Couldn't do a full squat. Um, so it pretty much killed all of my training for the entire week leading up to the event. So I couldn't train or anything. Messed up the cut. Obviously, there's. There's added nerves with that, too, you know, when you're not in the gym every day. Leading up to the competition, I went out there. I wasn't really able to pull guard because I couldn't get, you know, full heal to butt connection, which is inevitable with playing guard. And I was very hesitant to shoot as well. So I came out with the idea of just trying to use hand fighting to tire my first opponent out, and then mainly look to get to under hooks or over hooks and do mostly upper body wrestling. In the beginning of the match, you know, successfully got to an underhook. I got to rear body lock. He tried to roll, and I ended up in top position and side control, but it was during the no points period, and then as the match went on, I gassed out, and eventually he ended up taking me down and then scoring with two hooks on the back.
Speaker A: So what's the injury?
Speaker D: Yeah, so I got an MRI, actually, after the event.
Speaker A: You waited? Wait, wait. You waited until after the event?
Speaker D: Yeah, I waited until after.
Speaker A: Knowledge or ignorance is bliss.
Speaker D: Yeah, exactly. I was like, I honestly, I don't even want to know what's wrong. I was like, I just go out there, compete, you know, I knew it was, like, the. The biggest event to date, and I really wanted to do it.
Speaker A: Think about not doing it.
Speaker D: It definitely was a thought in my head, especially that, that the day after, you know, it's always the worst day. Whenever you have, like, a serious injury is the day after. And I was like, mandy, I really can't do a full squat. I was like, I don't even know how I'm going to be able to do this. It got a bit better over as the week went on, but I was like, man, I have to go out there and compete. It'll always be in the back of my mind. What if I ended up pulling out?
Speaker A: What did you think about this whole.
Speaker B: I thought he was just being a pussy.
Speaker A: Yeah, just slap him around. Just yell at him.
Speaker B: I didn't think we pressured you. We just saw you make your own decision. Right.
Speaker A: We're just like, is that tricky thing to do, like, with a heavily, like, like a serious injury like this?
Speaker D: We didn't know that was the thing. We didn't know. Honestly, initially, I thought it was I tore my lateral meniscus, but that ended up not being the case. It ended up being a full ACL tear. I was actually super surprised when I got the MRI results. So, yeah, we didn't know how bad it actually was.
Speaker A: What do you think about that situation?
Speaker C: I think Nikki's a tough kid. And, I mean, when you're so close to that competition, you know, there's not many, you don't get a. Get many opportunities like that to compete in front of, you know, 15,000 people. It's like, you know, props to you for pushing through it and getting it. And, man, he had a close match with one of the best grapplers in his weight classes. Like, you know, a few adjustments here and there and especially, you know, if he was able to train pre previously leading up to that match, I think he pulls it out.
Speaker A: So some of the things you mentioned is nerves. There's extra nerves just because of you. Under prepared.
Speaker D: Yeah, I mean, you know, feeling under prepared, you want to go into a competition with, you know, the confidence. I did everything that I could leading up to this vent. I trained as much as I could. And then when an injury prevents that, you start to doubt yourself more.
Speaker A: How do you guys think about injury? How do you train, you know, training with the best in the world, training to be the best in the world and avoiding injury has. You've gotten. You tore your bicep?
Speaker C: Yeah, yeah, I tore bicep curls or, dude, honestly, I. I was, I was a body, I was bodybuilding, you know, for like seven years. And no lie, I did. I trained biceps, like, most days. Like, almost that. Almost every day in those seven years, pretty much, I injured my. I injured myself.
Speaker A: That's so jersey man.
Speaker B: Anything else or just the biceps?
Speaker C: Just. I mean, yeah, I injured the bicep pretty much. I. The day before a wrestling practice, I had, like, a killer arm day. And by arm day, I just mean training biceps very rigorously, getting a sick punch pump. And, uh, I go to wrestling practice the next day, you know, pretty late. I should have been there. I didn't get a proper warmup in, and the first thing I do is I shake hands and I go to shoot a single leg, and boom, I just blew my arm out. The. The first movement I did. So just not being warmed up properly, in addition to, you know, having a very vigorous arm day a few hours prior year.
Speaker A: You hear that about warm up? So, like, what, what are some lessons about avoiding injury and training?
Speaker C: It, I would say, number one is. Is warming up properly. Make sure. Making sure your. Your body is hot before you do hot stuff.
Speaker A: Okay. And what does warm up look like for you? Is it jujitsu or non jiu jitsu stuff?
Speaker C: Yeah, just for a warm up in general, I'll do. I'll do something like a. If I'm talking competition, something like a jog, walk back and forth a few times, then a sprint jog a few times to get that heart rate, you know, up and down. And then I'll grab a partner. Actually just filmed a dvd or instructional, specifically on the pre match ritual. In addition to that, I'll, you know, grab a partner. I'll drill some movements. Typically, I'll drill some bad things. Like, I'll start from bottom, bottom mount, bottom slide, control, work out from there. And in pretty much like 20 minutes in, I'm. I'm hot and I'm ready to go for, you know, rounds.
Speaker A: Well, what about you, Greg? So what. What's. What's the way to avoid injury? What's the worst injury you've had?
Speaker B: What's the worst injury? I don't even know. I'm pretty good, pretty healthy.
Speaker C: Whenever you. Whenever you quit and practice, I'm like, that's a mental.
Speaker A: Has your heart ever been broken?
Speaker B: Many times. Many times. But there's a thing I notice people that spend the most time warming up, often the most injured. It's a strong correlation.
Speaker A: You can't argue with science.
Speaker B: I remember.
Speaker A: You're right.
Speaker B: Training with Oliver Taz. Oliver Tazza would have a 60 minutes warm up.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Surprise, surprise. Always injured. Yeah, very common. Yeah, I find that very common. The training room? No, I think people. It's how they train. Like, if you, like me, first sign of discomfort, backpedal, you know, push through that stuff. Go too hard. Go when you're too tired. You know what I mean? Get too emotional in the role. I feel like those are the times that I've been hurt where I just like, oh, I can't let this guy get me when I have that attitude and train. I believe it's how you train and sort of.
Speaker A: So what does this come from? Like, positionally too? Like. Cause you're training against some killers. I mean, you train, you train. You're training with him and going probably pretty hard.
Speaker C: Craig gets a little tired. He's like, yeah, I'm good for today.
Speaker B: We go once a month with Nikki.
Speaker A: Right?
Speaker B: That's it.
Speaker A: And then you quit, like, 30 seconds in, just.
Speaker B: Yeah, you know, you gotta be safe.
Speaker A: I like it. What. What about you? What have you learned from the ACL, Tara?
Speaker B: Rehab. Yeah.
Speaker D: Yeah, rehab definitely would help.
Speaker A: Oh, so you haven't been, like, I didn't get surgery.
Speaker D: I didn't do essentially any rehab. I just have no acl in my left leg.
Speaker A: So what's it like having no surgeon.
Speaker B: Goes, you've got two options. Surgery, rehab. Only Nikki goes, I'll do nothing.
Speaker D: Definitely should pick up on the rehab.
Speaker A: What's it. What's rehab for? That look, like, like, twice a day doing some weird, clueless, like, bands or something.
Speaker B: It's good. He's learned from his. He's learned some valuable lessons from. About taking care of his body.
Speaker A: Yeah. What's it like just training with no ACL?
Speaker D: So at the beginning, it was definitely a little iffy. I would have an occasional buckle. Like, I'd just be wrestling with somebody and go to step back and it buckle backwards a bit. But honestly now, like, I haven't had a single buckle instance in a while. It feels 100% normal when I train. It feels better than my other knee, to be honest. I had my meniscus taken out in my right leg, and that one gets sore more often than the. The no ACL leg.
Speaker A: Okay. All right. So putting that aside, is there. Is there wisdom you've learned from that experience?
Speaker D: Yeah, definitely should be doing rehab and. And prehab, you know, I think that, you know, especially if you're a hobbyist or a professional athlete, you should be lifting, you know, whether you're rehabbing an injury or just for injury prevention.
Speaker A: So I'm actually closer to correct because I've trained my whole life, like, pretty hard, obviously just a hobbyist, but like, twice a day did judo, wrestling, all that. Never broke anything, never injured. Kind of like similar philosophy, except, like, last year, I guess, a year and a half ago, I got a tiny, like, groin pull injury and it still hasn't healed. And I've been using your approach of not giving a shit.
Speaker D: Yeah.
Speaker A: And like, I surely this is gonna heal. It'll be fine, but it hasn't. Of course, if I was, like, an actual athlete, I would, like, probably still train through it, just fuck it, figure it out. But when you have other stuff going on, you just kind of wait it out. Yeah, but no, I think probably we have. Especially as you get older, you have to do that kind of stuff.
Speaker C: I think it's important for people to determine whether what they're going through is an injury or they're just hurt a little bit. Because injury, you know, for sure take time, rehab it, and get better. But a lot of people, like, they'll stubble toe or something. Like, you're out for a few weeks, you know, so.
Speaker A: Well, that's, that's the problem with the injury I have. It feels like a stubbed toe. So I was like, I'll just wait a couple days, it'll be fine. And then a couple days later, it's not fine, and you wait, and then I never got an MRI. Never got any of that. It's like, I'm sure I'll be fine. Yeah. So it's hard to know sometimes. Like what? It's hard to know. I feel like a lot of people will just not check it out, be fine. Well, because there's several failure cases. There is a failure case of where everything is a stub toe. You're like, fuck it. Like, like, you're bleeding everywhere. Yeah, that's fine, whatever. So you have to be careful. A lot. A lot of. A lot of people can fall into that too. I think I'm in that category. Go to the doctor. Why do you go to the doctor?
Speaker C: Yeah.
Speaker B: Your best approach is typically wait until something else gets hurt so that you'll forget about the grind.
Speaker A: That's. Yeah, exactly. That's. I was hoping. I was hoping to get hurt. So. Waiting for the. For the broken heart, maybe. Okay, that was very helpful. Oh, you mentioned you're doing a whole thing on the pre match ritual. Can you kind of preview, like, what kind of, what's involved in your pre match ritual?
Speaker C: It's a pretty big in the wrestling culture and the fighting culture. Like, kind of what, what to do before your competition. But I think a few of our, a few people are just kind of missing out. Exactly. You know, what to do. So I break it down for them. I break it down to people, like four weeks in advance, how you should prep, you know, your training and your nutrition and your sleep for competition. In addition to that, I break it down even, like, to a smaller scale with a, like what, how early you should get to the event, when you should be visualizing, you know, your competition, what to do, like, you know, 30 minutes before, 20 minutes, ten minutes, five minutes, and the kind of mentality you should have throughout those, those times before you actually step onto the map.
Speaker A: When are you visualizing, like, how much are you visualizing the actual, when you say competition, you're talking about the tournament or the actual people you might be competing against?
Speaker C: A little bit of both. I'll spend time just visualizing the crowd. Like, if it's going to be, you know, an arena with 15,000 people, I'll spend time in practice and whatnot, like putting myself inside that arena and visualizing, you know, stepping on the mat and hearing the, hearing the crowd scream and whatnot. That way, you know, when competition time comes, it's kind of the same deal. I'm accustomed to it. In addition, when I get to the arena, I'll step on the mat, I'll kind of look at everything. I'll expose my senses to, to what it's going to be, and then I'll kind of shut everything off. Like a lot. Some people, you know, scroll through their phone and can treat it like normal, have this normal conversations. For me, I like to limit my sensory input, my sensory intake before I go out and compete. I just feel like sometimes. I feel like sometimes we only have so many decisions you can make in a day, and I want all of my best decisions to be made when it matters, when it counts.
Speaker A: What about you? What's do you have limit your sensory.
Speaker B: Input on game day? Honestly, no. Routine, nothing. Eh, I don't know. Yeah, I don't do anything.
Speaker C: I'm just like, guys, a double silver.
Speaker B: We're both.
Speaker A: Instructional. I help you.
Speaker B: I'll get another silver now. Honestly, nothing. Hey, I just try to relax, treat it like it's before training.
Speaker A: Have a visualizations or.
Speaker B: No, no visualization.
Speaker A: So the opposite of visualization, you just avoid it?
Speaker B: Yeah, yeah. I don't even think about it. I'm just like, yeah, we'll have a good time, you know, try to appreciate it that I can do it.
Speaker A: By the way, when you visualize, are you visualizing tough positions or you visualize winning? Mostly.
Speaker C: Definitely visualize winning. I'll visualize how I can get, how I'm going to get to my most dominant positions because, you know, in comp, I want to do what I'm best at and I'm also see, I see my opponent in his best positions and how I'm going to escape those if necessary. But most of the time, I'm just visualizing exactly what I'm going to do in that match and I go out there and do it.
Speaker A: Okay, so what, when your teammate Craig is, you know, another, like, world class athlete has a fundamentally different philosophy than you do, you visualize being frustrated at him?
Speaker C: Not frustrated, but I'll definitely come into practice with, like, solutions to problems that Craig gives me. You know, like if Craig's Craig's, you know, catching me something or give me issues, like, you know, I'll go home, I'll, I'll watch a match that he lost for some motivation and I'll come back and off, I'll put it on.
Speaker A: Just dm him like a highlight reel of him losing.
Speaker C: Yup.
Speaker A: What about you? Like, does it affect you that you're a bit of an outlier?
Speaker B: Usually before I compete, right before I go out there, I go, why am I doing this? Do I still need to do this? And I think, hopefully don't embarrass myself, affects my instructional sales. That's the last thought. But I don't even put too much thought into the whole competing thing. I'm just like, you know what? Train hard, hopefully have a good time out.
Speaker A: What about the motivation aspect? Like that, that voice that says, like, why am I doing this? That voice can break a lot of people. Like, in the weight cut, it can break a lot of people. Like, why am I doing this stupid, silly sport? Like you said, a bunch of dudes just rolling around, like, what's the point?
Speaker B: I'll call someone with a nine to five job and I'll be like, yeah, that's why I'm doing this. Avoid that.
Speaker C: So those Dvd's, man.
Speaker B: Yeah, I didn't get too deep on competing people.
Speaker C: Yeah, we're so polar opposite. It's like almost uncomfortable to be around you.
Speaker B: Obviously one of us is a clean athlete.
Speaker A: You should do a DvD on that. What about you in terms of preparing for competition, Mickey? The day before, the day of, are there rituals that you follow?
Speaker D: Honestly, the few days leading up to it, it's different for me every time. Like sometimes I'll warm up before that, I compete. Sometimes I won't. Sometimes I'll fast, sometimes I'll eat. So it literally is just completely random. I don't follow any specific thing, but in the training room leading up to the competition, I'll definitely, you know, like, Nikki Rod, visualize that I'm walking out onto the competition mats. You know, I'll pick somebody that's a similar body type to the person that I'm competing against. And then we'll start out with some distance between us. We'll come out smack hands and, you know, act like everything's a real competition. I'll even sometimes have, you know, corners that will yell out times and things like that just to replicate it as much as possible.
Speaker A: That's funny, because I've talked to a lot of Olympic gold medalists. I used to do a podcast with, like, athletes, and they all sound like Nikki Rod. The two of you are outliers. I don't know. Sometimes I'll do this sometimes anyway. But that's also jujitsu culture. I think maybe the chaos of not taking things too serious is actually really, really helpful. Sometimes the pressure of taking everything way too seriously can break you.
Speaker B: I mean, I just don't think it's that big a sport, really.
Speaker C: You know, I think if I compete every day in practice, it just makes competition much easier. So I just put the pressure on there.
Speaker A: On the competition? Yeah, yeah, on the. SorrY. On the training, on the competing and the training. I don't know. Olympic sports aren't that big either financially, and people take it extremely, extremely seriously. Like, you don't really get that much money from Judas.
Speaker B: I mean, I just don't take jiu jitsu that seriously. Cause, like, I was just partying, having a good time until 21, and then I was like, oh, fuck, do I get a job or do I pursue professional sports? And I feel like if I can made a career in jiu jitsu with a decision at that point, and now.
Speaker A: You just stumbled your way somehow into, like, being at the top of the world.
Speaker B: Yeah, that's what I feel like. I just walked into it. I feel like I couldn't just do that in wrestling, boxing. I couldn't do that in other sports.
Speaker A: What was the toughest match you ever had that pushed you mentally? Physically? Technically, this doesn't have to be the best person you face, but was there, like, a moment in your career that was, like, really defining for you?
Speaker D: I mean, I would say, like, the toughest mentally was just this. This last ADCC, you know, I just had a big injury leading into it that kind of screwed the whole camp and weight cutting everything up. So, yeah, I would say. I would say the last ADCC.
Speaker A: Are you proud of your performance there? Like, you stepped on the mat that you. You pushed through all of it. It.
Speaker D: Like I said, I'm a very competitive person, and I hate losing, so. Definitely not. Yeah.
Speaker B: You had to collapse long.
Speaker A: Actually.
Speaker B: He was so physically exhausted afterwards, couldn't breathe. We had to get medical intervention. He thought he had a collapse lung.
Speaker D: So he was the most attired that I've ever been in my life in that match. I actually popped the blood vessel in my eye. I was trying so hard.
Speaker C: He comes out, he walks off of the ADCC. Matt backstage, and I'm like, I'm kind of getting warmed up for my match. And Nikki Ryan comes. He walks over huffing and puffing. His mom's right next to me, looks at her. He was like, I think I need help. I think I was a lung collapse.
Speaker D: Not true. My mom's the one that called for medical.
Speaker C: Okay.
Speaker D: I was just laying on the warm up mat, fucking dying.
Speaker C: Well, we'll have your fine two working long.
Speaker A: Laid it all on the line. What about you, Craig?
Speaker B: Defining or toughest matches? I mean, they're all pretty tough, you know? I don't know. I can't really pinpoint one. I mean, probably the most annoying one was obviously the one where I had Gordon Amber. I was like, tap, bro. And he wouldn't tap, so I let him out. Mentally, I was like, I shouldn't have done that.
Speaker A: Do you ever thing in your brain where it says, should I shit talk now or not? And you ever you say, no, I'm gonna be respectful.
Speaker B: I just be serious.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: About some of these. I don't know. It's just silly.
Speaker A: It's just all of it, the whole thing. What about you, Nicky, man?
Speaker C: Dude, honestly, most of my toughest matches are in the training room, right? Cause I started with these guys. I started training under them, like, you know, started training at dds when I didn't have. Have any knowledge, like, of, like, I knew wrestling. I knew, like, a knee cut in jiu jitsu, but, like, I started training with them when I knew almost no jujitsu. And then I had to, like, you know, really work my way up. So definitely in the training room, like, being, like, having one of these guys on my back or, like, there's a stretch of, like, a few weeks or months when Covid first hit and there was just, like, four of the best grapplers in the world. And we just did drilling in live rounds with these four guys. And it was just. It was. It was hard. It was very hard. You know, every. Every round, doing six rounds, seven days a week with the best grapplers in the world. And it's like you get no break and you're forced to learn on the go. So I think in that, for me in the training room, that was definitely my. My toughest matches, and that's where I built, you know, those mental calluses.
Speaker B: There was a period where I drew with Nikki ride probably, what, nine months, twelve months. And typically speaking, like I said, no warm ups. The first round, we usually take it pretty easy. First round, you started mount the whole room. The rest of the training room, they take Mount very lightly. Me and Nicky Rod would be fighting to the death every day. I felt like we did an extra round every day. It was very grueling.
Speaker C: I'm very. I'm very mean when I'm in the midst of drilling or lie or live, like we would do. We would drill wrestling, you know, quite a bit. Like stand up and in the drilling, like, I just wouldn't let Craig take me down. Like, we're not going live. We're just drilling. But I just wouldn't let him put me on the floor. So things like that, you know.
Speaker A: I know it escalate.
Speaker C: Yeah.
Speaker A: So you mentioned mount, like, so you do positional training. So is that. Would that be the hardest versus, like, live training? Open, like, starting from guard, I would.
Speaker C: Say mount and turtle definitely, definitely made me very tough because you spent all this effort getting off of bottom out, and then you got to get on top of a guy in the. At the time, I'm not that good at holding guys down, escape quick, and I'm like, fuck, I just tried to hold him down. Got to go back down. Same thing with a turtle. It's like you. You start bottom turtle, you're trying to explode. Get out, get away. And then, you know, you switch and this guy get up, gets up pretty quick, and you're like, damn, I got to go right back down. Was that constant circle, man, it's very tough, but definitely, you know, build some character on the mat.
Speaker A: What do you think is the value of positional training in general? In Jiu Jitsu, actually, this one, just interacting with you guys, it's not commonly done and just like regular jujitsu gyms would you see? Because probably it's not commonly done because it's so. Most of the experience is just frustrating. Like, if you're evenly matched. You're basically frustrated the whole time. If you, if you're doing it right.
Speaker C: There'S a psychological battle that happens in like, the mountain turtle rounds. It's like, you know, because you, maybe you get close to subbing a guy and, or maybe you do sub him. You know, when you start and turtle and you're on their back, you finish them and then you get this high point and then immediately you got to go back down to defensive posture. Yeah, it's very, like, it's emotionally, like up and down. So it's hard to deal with.
Speaker B: Super important if you're one of the better people in the gym because it just puts you in positions you don't find yourself in in regular training. So I think like a lot of, uh, if you're a big fish in a small pond and you don't do positional sparring, you're probably going to get exposed in competition. You might even look silly in those positions. So you really have to force yourself to do it, it despite the fact that you're giving someone worse than you a position where they might catch you. So you have to sort of put the ego aside.
Speaker A: Yeah, that's one of the things. When I was training regularly, of course, training with you guys, it's like trivial, but I didn't work on putting myself in bad positions. When you get better and you regret it because the big negative thing consequence it has on competition is you don't take as many risks because you're kind of afraid of for your back to get taken, all that kind of stuff.
Speaker B: That was me before I went to dds. I remember I showed up there in that old position. I was like, fuck this. You better earn this position. I didn't really have escapes. That was a learning curve for me, for sure.
Speaker A: Do you see the value in positional training or is it just the source of tremendous frustration?
Speaker D: Yeah, I definitely think it plays a big part in your confidence when you step out onto the, the competition mats, you know, being confident that even if you get put in the worst possible situations, you know what to do and know how to work out of them.
Speaker A: I had a long argument with Hodgep when he visited, and he thinks Mount is the most dominant position, even Nogi versus Beck. Is there a case to be made for that or no, do you think?
Speaker C: I think all of your opponents utensils, their tools are in front of them. So, like, if you're on Mount, they still have, you know, there's a few ways to get out Mount. I think if you're on somebody's back. I'd personally much rather be on somebody's.
Speaker B: Back than flattened out. I'd rather have someone's back and then flattened out.
Speaker C: Boots in. Flattened out?
Speaker A: Yeah, boots in flat. So not. Not even body triangle, but just flattened.
Speaker B: Just completely flat. Almost like the position in May where you see guys get finished because they can't get out. I think that position is probably the hardest position to escape.
Speaker A: Can you see what Hodges talking about with Mount, or is he just that good at mount that he says that.
Speaker B: You might mean the gee cross collar, you know? I don't know. Or did he mean.
Speaker A: He says controlling wise, he just believes that you can complete that there's. He actually thinks there's more ways to get out from the back than there is from the mount prior to getting up, including, like, physically prior to the kipping escape.
Speaker B: I would probably agree with him, but that kipping escape's so difficult to manage. It's the funny looking escape where your legs are wiggling. PeoPle have a lot of trouble. It's like, super hard to learn how to do, but then once you learn how to do it, the effectiveness is just huge.
Speaker A: Yeah, it's a WEird one when that come to be a thing. Is that pretty recent?
Speaker B: I mean, I saw Dds guys using it first, I think.
Speaker D: Yeah.
Speaker A: Who's the first guy to discover something like that? This seems like a RiDiculous thing to discover.
Speaker B: Yeah. What if I just wiggle?
Speaker C: I thought it was a joke at first. I was. You guys really doing this?
Speaker A: I remember somebody showing me, like, a technique where, like, if you just, like, walk your hand on a mat or something like that.
Speaker C: Maybe arm triangle or something.
Speaker B: Yeah, walk the army.
Speaker A: And it's just like a funny discovery, like, as opposed to, like, trying to, like, shove it in, just like, walk it.
Speaker B: I like doing that to people, but with things that aren't true. You know what I mean? I'll just tell them this is a technique and watch him try to work out if I'm being serious or nothing.
Speaker A: Yeah, that's what you do when you achieve guru status. They'll just listen to you like you're Steven Seagal.
Speaker B: See what they'll believe.
Speaker A: Speaking of which, how do you balance. You have to travel all across the world. How do you balance that with running a school, with being a world class jujitsu athlete?
Speaker B: I mean, the secrets of travel for me are two drugs, Xanax and Modafinil. That's how we time adjust and we hit the ground running.
Speaker A: But what does modafinil do? Do Xanax puts you asleep?
Speaker B: Yeah. I mean, I have narcolepsy. It's an narcolepsy medication. But.
Speaker A: How does that work with the steroids?
Speaker B: I mean, they work well together, you know?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Nice focus and physical recovery. But in terms of traveling and training stuff, it is. I mean, we're lucky cause we got so many high level guys so we can travel, and they're still. Still in good hands. I mean, it would be a problem if me, Nikki Rod, and Nikki Ryan left and the gym had Ethan. That would be a problem. But we got to make sure it's not just him that.
Speaker A: Although everyone says they're happy when you're gone, so. That's the rumor I heard.
Speaker B: Happy when I'm gone. But they do miss me. Yeah, for sure. Until I get back. All right.
Speaker A: What about you? Just, like, balancing it? Do you try to stay completely focused on competing for some of the big match you have coming up? Are you able to kind of diversify?
Speaker C: Well, I like to diversify my training to where if I'm don't have a competition scheduled, I'm more focused on skill development and, you know, getting better and broadening. Broadening my tool shed. But, you know, if I'm, like, six weeks before comp, I really start amping up the intensity that I bring into the mats against bringing some of that visual visualization towards practice. And maybe I train less volume pre competition, but higher output per session.
Speaker A: Yeah. What is a perfect week of training.
Speaker C: Look like if I'm not in, if I'm not in competition mode? I would say Monday, Wednesday, Friday, twice every other day. Just once if I'm pre comp, just Monday, Monday to Sunday, once a day.
Speaker A: So that's on the mat. You're doing the full, like, positional training, live training bicep curls.
Speaker C: Oh, yeah, I do a lot of bicep curls. Yeah, I lift a few times a week now. Yeah.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Cardio or no, cardio is all math.
Speaker C: Cardio is all matt stuff. I do. I do do some CrossFit workouts. Like, crossfits. I'll do, like, some emoms or some amraps or crossfit, you know, terms.
Speaker A: That's my instagram.
Speaker C: Yeah. But, yeah, Crossfit is a good way to kind of, like, push that. That threshold sometimes on the mat because I'm so good, I can't always get that. That, like, full red line. So I'll hop in across the gym, and I'll do some workouts that, you know, bring me closer to death.
Speaker A: What. What about you? Craig, what is a perfect week in training look like? Like when you're back home training.
Speaker B: I try to be at the gym twice a day every day when I'm back, just because I travel a bit more than these guys. So I try to be there eight and twelve every day, hang out in between, usually, definitely, usually train both of those sessions depending on how my body feels.
Speaker A: So doing positional, doing everything, technique positional live.
Speaker B: I should probably do more positional because I'm just trying to work on wrestling and stuff. And especially leading up to the Volkanovski's last fire, I was trying to wrestle more and focus on those areas even before I travel over there. Just some experimentation with some stuff.
Speaker A: But, yeah, how do you experiment with stuff? Like, how do you. So there's like regular positional stuff, but when you have ideas, like what? Like, where do you do it in during the training sessions to do it outside of that? You get, you get together with somebody.
Speaker B: Usually every session I show up with something. I'm thinking of usually selling from top, maybe something for bottom, but. And then I just try to maybe pick the right people. Some people, obviously, I'm just fighting to the death with, it's not a good time to experiment. And then others, obviously, you can play around with ideas on.
Speaker A: Okay, what about you? What's a perfect week look like? Maybe. Well, you said you're 100% now.
Speaker D: Yeah. So, yeah, honestly, I have pretty much the same schedule as Nikki Rod. So Monday, Wednesday, Friday, I do twice a day, every other day, once a day, and then normally noon practice is like our biggest class. That's where, you know, all the pros go in. So I tend to do more open rounds there. And then we have a 07:00 p.m. class as well, which is more hobbyist. And that's where I'll do my positional rounds and, you know, force myself to be put in bad positions.
Speaker A: So you have what you do 08:00 a.m. twelve, like, in terms of what B team has 08:00 a.m. twelve and 07:00 p.m. and the hobbyists are more. 07:00 p.m. yes. Okay. Do you believe in overtraining? Do you think you can overtrain?
Speaker C: I used to not believe, but I, then I got hurt.
Speaker A: Oh, you attribute that to over training?
Speaker C: I think, dude, I'm telling you, I trained. I lifted like a bodybuilder for like, seven years. And by lifting, I mean I was lifting seven days a week. And I trained arms most days, like, almost every day I would do like, you know, four or five sets and get a, get a pretty good bicep in addition to my lift. I think that had to contribute somewhat toward, towards my.
Speaker A: What about. Fair enough. Well, what about on the actual mat? Overtraining, like spending too much time on the mat? Well, psychological, physical overtraining, I think you.
Speaker C: Can definitely over train, but it's more of a, like, if your body's healthy, you have to make sure your mind is sharp. Like sometimes maybe taking a day away or even, even diverting your attention in a different aspect of training can help you be a little bit sharper overall. Sometimes it can be like, uh, it can get a little like, um, stagnant because you're doing the same stuff over and over. But I think if you just keep like, you know, over training, then your overall baseline just gets higher and you, that become, you become, you know, accustomed to that.
Speaker A: Uh, what about you? You don't seem like a guy that overdo.
Speaker B: I've heard of it. Never been close to it. I think, uh, controlling, uh, how hard you train is definitely protects you from injury. You know what I mean? Like, if you're redlining yourself and then you're fighting to the death in the gym, that's 100% when you're going to get injured, gonna get sick. So I try to make sure I've, I've had enough sleep, I've had obviously enough food post training. And that sort of helps me to train a bit harder, but still try to avoid redlining myself too much, I.
Speaker C: Think established also, like, what days are going to be your peak days. Cause you're either out the week. If you're training seven days a week, you're going to have ups and downs. Like, for me personally, when they. Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, usually my best days. And besides that, also have other great days.
Speaker A: All my days are great, but Monday, Wednesday, Friday are also great. You're like, unable to admit that some days are often. I'm always on, bro. Okay. What advice would you give to people who are not always on hobbyists? How to get better. Like, people that are already there. I don't know. Purple bells, brown bells, black bells. They're just like doing like a couple times a week or something like that. Like, how do you get better?
Speaker C: I think being consistent, like, find a schedule that you can consistently train. Maybe it's like, you know, three, four times a week or even a little bit less. Just be consistent over the, over the years. I think too, too often people are like, oh, I want to get really good, really fast, and it's so, like, definitely takes a long time to get to where you want to be.
Speaker A: What about the. What you're doing during, like, while being consistent, what kind of stuff you're working on?
Speaker D: So, honestly, I think one big thing for me, which something I actually started doing once. Once b team was formed, was filming all of your rounds and then watching it every day because you can see what specific problems you're having, and then you can base your positional rounds around those problems.
Speaker A: That's really interesting. It's kind of depressing, though.
Speaker D: Yeah.
Speaker A: Like, sometimes I have to. You know, I edited this podcast for a long time. I still do in part, and I hate the sound of my voice and, like, what I look like. It's tough, but it does make you better.
Speaker D: Yeah.
Speaker A: And I also hate the sound of Craig's voice. This would be doubly difficult, but I'm glad, glad the rest of you are here. I don't know, know. That's. That's. Do you. What, do you watch competition footage of yourself or. No. Um, like, to analyze, like, my confidence.
Speaker C: That's fucking good.
Speaker A: While you're doing curls.
Speaker D: Yeah.
Speaker A: Is there advice you, Craig, would give for hobbyists to get better?
Speaker B: I mean, just, uh, not every round has to be a fight to the death, you know? I feel like you're going to get into it burnt out. That way you're not gonna learn as much.
Speaker A: It's tough. I would say just as a black belt who took juices very seriously for a very long time, basically, when you become a hobbyist, your skill is basically slipping your age and your skill. And so not taking stuff seriously is actually its own psychological skill of, like, you go that it's tough. It's tough. Like, it's tough in a way that is different. When you're like a blue belt or something, that you're. If you work hard and you train correctly, you're gonna get much better. Here. You're kind of.
Speaker B: You're looking downhill.
Speaker A: You're looking downhill and you're like, yeah, I guess I'm gonna enjoy the art of it.
Speaker B: Reframe the victory. You know? Like, if it's a young, upcoming guy and he comes to me, you're like, well, that's a moral victory, you know?
Speaker A: Yeah. But then that hat that has to happen, you have to be able to not do that to avoid the injury sometimes, like, if you want. So, yeah, it's a different. It's a different thing. Plus, plus, with me, just because some people recognize me, they coming you have that? Probably. You guys definitely, obviously have that.
Speaker B: I've solved that problem.
Speaker A: What? How did you solve that problem?
Speaker B: Travel around, you do a seminar, anything like that?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: It's believable that you could get submitted once, but if they catch you, give them a few.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: If people tell their friends they submit a bit of seminar one time. Believable. Yeah, they got me four or five times. Yeah, you've robbed them of that.
Speaker A: Okay, that's pretty funny. But it's also, they have this energy. Like, they think, you know, they're coming in hot. And I usually like to just basically get submitted quickly twice, and just. It changes everything. It makes it more fun. I've noticed.
Speaker C: Let them submit you twice.
Speaker A: Yeah. Just, like, very quickly, what you get, like, what are the options?
Speaker C: Longer. Hold off.
Speaker A: But then it's like. It's very hard to, like. Yeah. If you're a very serious competitor and so on, you take it seriously, then. Yes. But, like, then people go. People. What they try to do, this probably is what happens to you guys. They try to impress you by going super hard.
Speaker C: I have people every day come to my gym, try to take me out. Yeah. I just stay sharp, come to practice. Let's get it on.
Speaker A: Do you feel that energy? I feel like I need to talk to Craig here for, like, at a seminar. Like, somebody is coming in, like, really hard. Like, a brown belt will come in, like, and they really want to impress you with, like, their technical side. They're a big fan. They've been watching your dvd's. Like, what do you do with a guy like that?
Speaker B: I make a complete joke out of the rock, you know, give them the pass, mess with them, do stupid shit, like, rob them of the realness of it, because it's stupid. I'm not going to roll hard with strangers. You know, I feel like you should roll with a circle of people you trust. Injuries happen rolling hard with strangers because that's the same way you get injured in competition, because you don't have that relationship with them.
Speaker A: And I should also mention that's probably not a good way to impress somebody's bag. Just going apeshit, going 100%.
Speaker B: Oh, yeah. Not at all.
Speaker A: I think the beauty of jiu jitsu is, like, the camaraderie of it. Like, as you get to know each other's technical, like, different ideas you have and all that. Yeah. Okay. Do you think Gigi jitsu is dying in popularity, Craig?
Speaker B: Yeah, it's long dead. I think it's just. I mean, it just shows, like, I mean, I have heard some numbers on the viewership for the GE worlds finals, and they don't even compare to the undercard of, like, who's number one. So I think, like, when I was coming up and competing in the ghill, the time you looked at those guys that won black belt championships and you were like in awe of them, it almost had that ADCC champion feel, but now that's not the case. You know, I just feel like that the younger generation aren't looking at who's winning. Black belt guy welds I personally don't think. And I don't think they're like, they want to be that guy. They want to be like a ritual. Oh, Gordon, you know, those are the people they want to emulate.
Speaker A: So you think, like, the gear, like Abby Jjdemen of Gee tournaments will just keep declining popularity?
Speaker B: I think people still do. I mean, it's easier, I think, as you over 30 because the key is a bit of a slower thing and the master's participation is bigger in the key because obviously in Nogi is now heading in a wrestling direction. Wrestling in hill hooks, you're over 30. That's a terrifying prospect. You know what's terrifying about the gi? Less so. I think in a participation rate, the IB's Jeff will still be good, but I just don't think people are as interested as they used to be.
Speaker A: Why is wrestling and heel hooks terrifying? Well, heel hooks I can vaguely understand. If you don't understand heel hooks, if.
Speaker B: You work a desk job and you've never wrestled and a guy double legs you, that's going to probably break your back. You know, I think the older guys are scared of wrestling. It's hard to wrestle at 40 to.
Speaker A: Learn wrestling at 40.
Speaker B: Yeah, yeah. I mean, I think it's even just hard in general to do wrestling at 40, but it's easy to pull guard, pull half guard in the gear at 40.
Speaker A: I think it's hard to do judo at 40 and people still do it at 40. Judo hurts more, Judah.
Speaker B: Scarier than all of them.
Speaker A: Yeah, I think. Does wrestling really hurt at 40? I don't know why I'm looking at you. Yeah, it does. Interesting. I mean, I feel.
Speaker C: I agree with you saying that judo looks like the most dangerous. Like, even their, their practice partners, they're just getting slammed flat. Bueno.
Speaker A: Yeah, I did. I mean, I did judo for a really long time. There's a lot of people that are 40, 50, 60 do judo, and they get.
Speaker B: They're the ones that are still alive, though.
Speaker A: It's true, uh, survivor bias. You do a little bit of, uh, judo, right?
Speaker B: Me? I'm a yellow belt.
Speaker A: You're a yellow belt and judo. I should be your instructor. Promote you to orange.
Speaker B: I got a yellow belt in the 6th grade, I believe was the 6th grade. I did it for about, I don't know, six months.
Speaker A: But you're also using, uh, judo in competition and basically, aren't you doing, like, horai type throw, like you're doing?
Speaker B: Yeah, I don't know where I learned that. I just started doing it.
Speaker A: You just started lifting your leg in various ways until it works.
Speaker B: Just figuring it out.
Speaker A: Yeah. Okay. Doing different kinds of tricks.
Speaker B: I looked at the samba guys doing. I was like, can't be that hot.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Gave it a crack.
Speaker A: Well, they looked at your foot locks and they said, that can't be that hard.
Speaker B: They said, can't be that hard. Ban it from the tournaments.
Speaker A: All right. What do you think is the best takedown in nogi jujitsu? Like what? Like, if people were trying to train for competition. So on, like, where you see the trends heading?
Speaker C: I think those foot sweep is like, catching fire nowadays. See a lot of foot sweeps, foot sweeps and arm drags. I would say pretty, pretty popular in our sport.
Speaker A: Arm drags. She's just got arm drag to.
Speaker C: Okay, arm drag. Either to get them, like, get to behind them or even just to cause reactions, make them pull away and we can start re attacking.
Speaker B: Are you talking about it in a context of what's the best takedown to score? What's the safest takedown to mitigate the risk of guillotine submission or most effective in general?
Speaker A: Yeah, most effective combined? Combined, yeah, yeah. I mean, I mean, ultimately it's about scoring.
Speaker B: I think any sort of, uh, body lock, you know what I mean? Locking your hands around the body, you've been able to put it to the floor that way. I feel like that's most effective save. It's might even have arisen out of a leg attack, leg entry, upgrade to the body.
Speaker A: What about, uh, like, foot sweeps? Like outside foot sweeps with what do we.
Speaker C: I would say, yeah, you know, uh, foot sweeps from outside foot sweeps or even like, something like you're tossing a Pullman body and you're sweeping the foot.
Speaker A: Yeah, those are all pretty safe. See, why is that scary? I don't understand. It's not scary at all.
Speaker B: I think it's the lifts that are scary.
Speaker C: The lifts? Yeah.
Speaker A: Who's lifting people?
Speaker C: I like a good lift return.
Speaker A: No, not you. I mean, in master, like, we're talking about older guys doing no geek.
Speaker B: Some of those old bosses take it very serious. They just start lifting TLT welts. They're coming. They're coming to impress.
Speaker A: Grab and lift. All right, just for the gram. Okay, what about submission? What's your favorite submission? And what do you think is the most effective submission except the buggy chair joke?
Speaker D: I would have to say the rear naked. It's definitely the one that's hit the most and the highest level of competition was that.
Speaker A: That was pretty interesting to see you escape all that and to put it on. That's the cool thing about Ebi, to see like the world class athletes. I was surprised that it's possible to escape with you on his back.
Speaker B: Gonna try some b cream.
Speaker A: Oh, yeah, b cream. What's in the beat? What's the formula? Or is that a secret?
Speaker B: That is a proprietary blend.
Speaker A: Okay, but that's what you use for greasing. That's what you before allegedly does it. Other application outside of grappling or.
Speaker B: I'm sure you can get creative.
Speaker A: All right, thanks. Asking for a friend. Is that RNC for you as well? Or naked renegade choke?
Speaker C: I mean, overall favorite for like, solidifying a finish. Cause like, you could push, you could put somebody sleep, right? Even if they don't want to tag, put him to sleep. But as far as like something I've been working on, now that I'm, I'm now starting to implement in competition. Yoko Senkaku side triangle is like, it's a beautiful thing. You have multiple options. You have the triangle to finish. If that fails, you have the kimora. You could break the arm. You could also just transfer and take the back. So Yoko san Kaku, I'm a big fan of, and I continue to progress and get better at it.
Speaker A: Have you ever broken anyone's arm?
Speaker C: Oh, yeah. I mean, the first 1st few competitions. Cause I was like, you know, pretty athletic grappler or athletic wrestler. Going against like local black belts and brown belts. Like my, one of my first matches, I broke somebody at kimora. Pretty much every time I've got a heel hook, which is only twice I've broken an opponent. If I have a joint lock, it's probably going to break like a lot of times it breaks before they attack. Yeah.
Speaker A: You seem like a really friendly fella. How hard is it to break an arm or any break a joint?
Speaker C: Well, I don't think it's that hard. I think, like, if you're talking like an, about an arm bar, we have this position to where like, people are kind of holding on to holding on, and then it slips and their arm starts going, and then it just. Just breaks before they even, you know, get a chance to tap.
Speaker A: I love the sport.
Speaker B: I knee barred a guy, and he didn't tap one time. And it was actually. It was surprising. I had to put a lot of force into that as opposed to arms, shoulders, and the ligaments in the knees and ankles. But to fully. This kid, sambo kid, fully let it go and he tapped it. I think the angle is, like, up.
Speaker A: Here, they're built different.
Speaker B: Hopefully, he can be reconstructed.
Speaker A: All right, what about a straight foot lock? You've ever. Do you guys do straight for locks at all, or. No?
Speaker C: Yeah, I mean, I'm learning them now. We had some kid come. Come into practice one day and, like, straight for, like, just this little, like, polish kid.
Speaker B: Not only did he footlock everyone, but he told the entire world, his friends.
Speaker C: And family, we practically put a hit out on him in practice, and he just. Everybody.
Speaker A: Yeah. So it's interesting when you get, like, yeah. People that specialize can surprise you that this could be effective stuff. Do you think there's other stuff that could be still discovered in jiu jitsu? Like, what. What areas do you think are ripe with techniques to discover? Like, wrestling is really interesting now. There's a lot of innovation happening in wrestling.
Speaker C: I think there'll be more innovation when we get people that are more adamant about standing up from bottom position. I think if we get more of the community, they're like, all right, I want to get off the bottom.
Speaker B: I think just stand up.
Speaker C: Just stand up.
Speaker A: How you just. It doesn't work.
Speaker B: We actually changed the name how sambo doesn't work. If you just did, you really.
Speaker A: Yeah. All right, I'll change it to jiu jitsu when I pirate it and send it for free to the entirety of the soviet bloc. Hey, Nikki, Rod, do you think ego is useful for martial arts, or does it get in the way?
Speaker C: Okay, I think you need to use it in both ways. For sure. Have an ego. Like, if you're. If you're training, competition mode, but also it can prevent you from learning and progressing if your ego is too high. Like, you really have to shut the ego down when you're in the mode of learning and trying to, you know, develop skills. Cause you're gonna put yourself in these bad positions. You're gonna have issues with, uh, training partners that aren't necessarily, you know, up to. Up to your skill level, but because you're in these bad positions, you have to make these certain sacrifices. And for sure, ego can be a good or bad thing. But if you're able to shut the ego off and learn, then that'll have huge progression when it's time to put the eagle on into use during competition.
Speaker A: When's the last time you put shut the ego off?
Speaker C: It's been a long time.
Speaker A: What about you, Craig? I mean, you seem to be super easygoing. Is there, like, is the ego just not part of it?
Speaker B: Oh, for sure. I just don't want anyone to know they've damaged my ego. You know, you have to suppress it deep down.
Speaker A: There's a child underneath all of it crying always, for sure.
Speaker B: I think ego is good for a bit of perseverance, you know, like, it'll help you stick it out against a tough battle with a training partner, for sure. Bit of egos on the line. Plus the bands are back and forth. We're trying to, like, stir each other up a bit. I think that helps hone, sharpen the ego a bit.
Speaker A: What about you? Do you seem like a super humble guy? Is there like a monster underneath?
Speaker B: It's a total act.
Speaker A: It's an act. Who's in the basement?
Speaker D: I think ego is a big motivator. You know, I think it's very good to have in the aspect that it, like, it'll drive you to help, to want to be one of the best in the world. But like Nikki Rod said, you need to be able to turn it off in the training room and, you know, force yourself into bad positions where you may not be winning.
Speaker A: Are there, like, you know, Don hurs mentioned Boris. Are there, like, grapplers? Like Boris? This is a question from Reddit, actually, Boris, like, characters, anybody you've trained with in the past who doesn't compete but is just an absolute beast in training. Like, people you've met, they're just like.
Speaker C: Well, somebody that I think has a, probably the best, like, submission grappling in MMA would. I think, like, Gilbert Burns is a, is a historic grappling. He's very, very good. I trained with him early, early on in my grappling career, and I was really impressed by his ability to move, hold down opponents that are trying to stand up. And as a whole, you know, he can, he can get submissions and put people way.
Speaker A: Have you, when's the last time, have you trained them recently or.
Speaker C: No, no, it's been a few years.
Speaker A: Which is impressive ability to submit, you're saying?
Speaker C: Yeah, like, I mean, you know, you would see. I'd see Gilbert go against a few, like, pretty decent black belts in the room. And farewell. And, you know, maybe he gets to their back, puts the choke in. It's like Gilbert's super high level grappling or submission grappling.
Speaker A: Yeah. But he's pretty widely recognized as a monster, so I don't know that he didn't really answer the question. It's like you're not even remember.
Speaker C: What was the question?
Speaker A: All right, what, me? Is there people like. You've done all these seminars, are there, just especially in the eastern block. You see, you went to Kazakhstan. Is there killers out there that.
Speaker B: Oh, yeah, there's tough guys out there, obviously. I don't remember the names, nor could I pronounce it if I did. But definitely some tough guys out there, obviously carrying skill sets over from wrestling, for sure. Not sambo, but wrestling. Wrestling.
Speaker A: Wrestling. But, yeah, just people that surprise you. They just don't compete that are really good. Have you met those?
Speaker B: I feel like it's less so today because there's so many. So many more athletes in the sport. But definitely when I was coming up back, like, in Australia and stuff, there were guys I'd train with that wouldn't compete, and that would be, like, super tough rounds for me.
Speaker A: Yeah. And there's so many more avenues for competing in general, so. Yeah. What about you? Have you met some monsters?
Speaker D: Yeah. One guy I could think of in particular is Jason Ralph. He's. He trains up in Long Island, I think. Right. Opened up his own gym out there.
Speaker B: Vanguard.
Speaker D: Yeah, Vanguard. He used to compete, but he would never be able to compete at the same level he would train at. So now he's just focused on mainly, you know, opening up a gym and teaching his students. But he was a guy that was, you know, extremely good in the training room, you know, world class. I still think to this day, he's. He's legitimately one of the best in the world. World, but just doesn't compete anymore.
Speaker A: Who wins in a fight? A lion or a bear? Polar bear, just for you read it. No, not a pole. Yes, it's a good question. You're all. Your polar bear is pretty impressive. No. Grizzly bear.
Speaker B: Grizzly bear. I think grizzly bear wins.
Speaker A: Well, who was the most threatening predator in Australia?
Speaker B: I mean, it's a tricky question here because everyone's scared of the animals in Australia, but, I mean, you get bitten by a snake, bit by a spider. That's not that bad. Bear America bear will just hold you down to eat you. That's a much more terrifying prospect for me. Even sharks. Sharks gonna be quick. No one sees the shark coming. The sharks just gonna bite you in half. A bear just holds you down and eats you. So that's. That's frightening for me. Australia is a bunch of just weird shit that can kill you.
Speaker A: Just see cocaine bear, the movie that's coming.
Speaker B: I saw the trailer. It looks good.
Speaker A: Yeah, yeah. So there's not every bear. There's, like, black belts and there's black belts. There's bears and there's bears. So that, I think that's what they often don't talk about. Everybody puts lions and bears in the same category. I think there's just some weak bears.
Speaker B: A lion would kill a black bear, I think.
Speaker A: Not every black. Again, I'm trying to tell you there's difference.
Speaker B: But grizzly and polo bound, betting on those.
Speaker A: Yeah. No, I think grizzlies have the size, but actually, every video I've seen of grizzlies, they tie within, like, 20 seconds. They get bored.
Speaker B: That's the gastang? Yeah, that's a Nikki Ryan Gastang. Right?
Speaker A: Yeah, that's all they got.
Speaker D: Tree mold.
Speaker A: And they try to just. They try to just take a breather. Like, there's these crazy fights between bears in the elastic 20 seconds.
Speaker B: I heard this story about a russian family that was attacked by a bear in Russia and killed the dad. And it took so long to eat the daughter, she made three phone calls to her mom. I was eating her. And the first call, the mom thought she was pranking her.
Speaker A: That's crazy.
Speaker B: That's way scarier than.
Speaker A: Yeah, that's terrifying.
Speaker B: Give me a snake bite any day.
Speaker A: Yeah, you know what? Let me. Let me change. The question is, um, like, if you had to, uh, fight a bear or a lion, how would you try to defeat it? Do you think you have a chance at all?
Speaker C: Well, I think I'd attack a lion a little bit differently if I attack a bear.
Speaker A: What would be the difference?
Speaker C: Okay, well, I've seen this video where, um, alliance are eating, and. And, uh, you have three, like, scratchy guys walk up behind them and kind of scare the cat off of. Off of their food. I think, uh, maybe I produce some props, scare the line away. Right. But if I have to fight it, um, if I have to fight it straight on. I mean, the thing is that you can't. Even if you take the back, like, you can't, like, bite it or choke it, the main is too big to lock your hands around, you know?
Speaker A: Are you sure about that?
Speaker C: It's like. It's like matted hair, right? I don't know. So I think.
Speaker A: You think you can back a draw on a line.
Speaker C: Maintain. Yeah, yeah, but, but getting there, getting there. I think I fake how I go low, make them think I'm going for the foot or something. A little Paul sweep. And I take the back.
Speaker A: What about, what about a bear? I feel like they're easier. That might be easier to take to hold back control.
Speaker C: Yeah, maybe. The thing is, if they. The bear falls on its back, just gonna crush it. So. So big. Substantially bigger than a line, right? Like a full grown.
Speaker A: And they're also like terrifyingly, like, loud with their wars and stuff.
Speaker C: Yeah, I think. I think so. First of all, if I saw grizzly, I'm like, are he's gonna attack me? I try to yell a little bit louder than maybe the term a little bit. Like give them a. And then. Yeah, for sure. I try to get behind it. I probably go like something weird, maybe like, like pull the eyes out or something, you know? For sure. I mean, I'm going for the vital organs, you know?
Speaker B: Play dead.
Speaker C: Play dead.
Speaker B: And then oil. Check it.
Speaker C: There's no. There's no pride in that.
Speaker A: Wow. Pride even matters. See the ego, the same advice you gave, you got to put the ego aside with a bear. Even then. Even then. Would you. How would you fight a bear or a lion? Just play dead.
Speaker B: Play dead. Yeah, yeah. Could you beat a kangaroo?
Speaker C: Joke.
Speaker B: A kangaroo?
Speaker A: Yeah, kangaroo.
Speaker C: I beat the shit out.
Speaker A: Kangaroo.
Speaker C: Yeah, yeah. I mean, are we boxing gloves? We just like.
Speaker A: How would a kangaroo attack a human?
Speaker C: Try to kick them with the claws.
Speaker B: Knock them down and then they choke him.
Speaker C: Stand on that tail.
Speaker A: The kangaroos, do.
Speaker B: They choke each other? Yeah.
Speaker A: They don't choke each other.
Speaker B: You don't believe me? You want to watch your video? They choke each other out.
Speaker C: I've seen this.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker C: Oh, yeah.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: With which they do them and just grip like this and hold it.
Speaker A: What's the grip? What, like a little pause? How are they gripping?
Speaker B: I promise you I'm not lying.
Speaker D: Pretty sure I've seen the video.
Speaker B: They also do strange shit. Like if there's a predator around, they'll wait in a pool of water, and then if it comes to attacker, they drown it. They're pretty smart.
Speaker A: Okay. Speaking of which, what's the most effective martial art for winning a street fight? You talked about rule sets and streets. I think you've talked about being a street. Have you ever been in a street fight?
Speaker B: Yeah. Just one?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Nothing special, nothing crazy.
Speaker A: Hey. Yeah. You don't talk about that time, like, for self defense purposes, what would be a strategy on the street? What's advice?
Speaker B: Whoever wins the street fights, whoever's willing to take it the furthest, the fastest. You know what I mean? If you're thinking you're gonna box and he's biting you, poking your eyes, that guy is gonna win. He wants it more. You know what I mean? That's why the crackheads fight. They go for the kill straight away, you know? So I feel like it's more about who's willing to do the most that's.
Speaker A: Going to win that fight fastest, the most fastest.
Speaker B: Who's got the least to lose, you know?
Speaker A: Okay. We can also define winning differently because you could also run away. But in terms of technique wise, wrestling.
Speaker C: I think if it's a one on one, I'd go. I go wrestle. Wrestler wins. But if it's like a, you know, it's like a multiple people, you gotta go muay thai. Stay on their feet. Can't go down to the ground if it's more than one person.
Speaker B: Yeah. Big double leg, maybe.
Speaker C: Yeah, double leg. Put him asleep on the. On the impact. Right. Four hits the ground.
Speaker B: Yeah. What's the goal here? Is to win the fight and not go to prison.
Speaker A: Um, I haven't thought of it through that way. Yeah, certainly. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Not go. Not to kill.
Speaker C: Mutual combat here in Texas. We good?
Speaker B: Is that in Texas?
Speaker C: Mm hmm.
Speaker A: Do you know if, with the paperwork for that, looks like you have to actually sign something?
Speaker C: Can you just say, I don't need to find out. I did hear a story where guys were on 6th street and they looked at a cop. They were like, mutual combat. Mutual combat. And just got, like, the cops to say yes and just duked it out. That could be false, though.
Speaker B: That sounds crazy.
Speaker A: I kind of admire that. But I've also been playing red dead redemption recently, so I've, like, internalized the cowboy a little. A little too much just to return to gym stuff. No, because it's a business. Because you're running a business, there's money involved, but you're also friends, but you're also training partners. Is there a tension that money creates that threatens to destroy friendships? That's something I always worry about with money. I try not to go do any kind of business with friends or family.
Speaker C: I think if we're all very clear and honest and open at the start, makes it Much easier. I think people have issues when there's, like, kind of like things are written in fine print and nobody knows the.
Speaker B: Exact answers and a lot of jujitsu guys can't read. That makes it.
Speaker A: We're learning that today.
Speaker B: Yeah. Hey, no, definitely complicated, though.
Speaker A: Yeah. I mean, it's not always obvious to how to be transparent and stuff and about everything. Have you felt that tension? Cause in the jujitsu world, money's not really unlimited. Just running at school. What's that like? Is this the first time you're running a school, running a gym? Yeah.
Speaker B: I mean, it's JusT constantly updating people about what's GoinG on, what your expectations are. You know what I mean? We've had some problems with coaches who I feel like, think the pie is bigger than it is. You know what I mean? They feel like maybe we're getting rich out of this and they're missing out on things. So it's like, even amongst managing staff, that can be challenging, too. So, yeah, I mean, it's a constant work in progress, not only to make sure everyone's happy, but to make sure they're comfortable enough to reach out out and tell you they're unhappy. But I feel like those challenges are common amongst any small business.
Speaker A: Still, it sucks just to mention I'm clueless to this, but I'm just not learning this. Somebody I met and talked to and I really like is Isaac. And just learned. Because you're also active on Reddit. What's your name on Reddit? I'm John Belushi's mom as on the.
Speaker B: COVID as possible, you know?
Speaker A: Oh, it's not you. It's actually John Belushi's mom. Right. So I've done my research, I guess. And I guess you guys had a falling out and have split. I just want to say that I don't know the few interactions I've had with him. He's a beautiful human being, so that just shows to me visually, maybe not internally and sexually, just the experience. He's just a kind person. I don't know. I liked him a lot. Like, to me, in a business setting, yeah. Tensions are created and it sucks. I don't know. I mean, I suppose money, all the stuff that happened in the jungle aside, probably money had a role to play to create extra tension. Money and egos about like, who is the leader, who is not the leader. It's tough. It's tough to manage that kind of stuff. I've seen it happen with jujitsu schools a lot. I don't know exactly what. Cause. It's like there is also a hierarchy inside grappling jujitsu schools, like people that are better or not. There's literally ranks, black belt and brown belt. There's like, competitors that are better. I mean, I don't. It's a weird dynamic in which to operate. Cause, like, usually there's more politeness and, like, humanity layered into the way a company works, but here there's just a bunch of. I mean, it's like violence laid on display, play plus money. It's crazy. Is there something you could say to that? Like how you try to minimize or something you want to comment on, Isaac?
Speaker B: Yeah, I mean, it was unfortunate situation, but it just didn't work out. You know, like, there's going to be personality clashes, some people.
Speaker A: I can't imagine anyone having a personality clash with you.
Speaker B: With me?
Speaker A: Yeah, it's hard to imagine.
Speaker B: Yeah. Surprising, you know, I mean, I didn't even know what to say on that. I don't want to touch on it too much. But obviously his expectations about his role in the gym, obviously different from ours, led to some personality clashes that were sort of unresolvable. You know, some things happen that can't be resolved. You can't fix those things, you know, obviously a lesson, I hope for both of us. Definitely a lesson for me from a management role to try to address these things sooner. But also, so sometimes I came up in a different time where there was no money, no opportunities. I had to pave that. I had to pave that way totally for myself, especially coming from Australia, like, being a professional athlete in jujitsu was not a thing. So I had to pave a lot of opportunities for myself. And I feel like sometimes, oh, I don't know what the right word is. Sometimes people don't appreciate some of the ways you help them them, and they just think, feel like almost they deserve or are entitled to certain things and that is very difficult to manage. But I think, again, like, we, we both SEe the situation different. I do hope he finds a better, a more comfortable place to train. But, yeah, obviously I've known him for a long time, sort of like a brotherly relationship. So that's going to really make personal problems a lot worse when you're that close to someone.
Speaker A: I just hated that. Like, I've seen it in jujitsu especially, but in other places where, like, close friendships were destroyed because of, like, gym stuff, like people running gyms. And it's JUst as a PeRSON who is, in this case, JUst a FaN, but in, like, in general, just like a student, it's like, sucks.
Speaker B: But again, in my position, sometimes I wonder if there really was a friendship or mere opportunity. I have to be careful of that with some people in the sport. Is it a sincere relationship or, like. I mean, it's difficult for me to tell. Or am I means to an end?
Speaker A: Sure. But I think it's actually a trade off because I think a lot of close friendships we have, like, even relationships we have, like, when tested, like, can break if they're not properly communicated. Like, some of it could be just misunderstanding of, like, for prolonged period of time. Not, not. It's not explained through just like, a lack of integrity. It's just like you, like, you have to, like, talk through that shit. Like, just be honest with each other.
Speaker B: Take some MDMA and really get down to it.
Speaker A: A drugs solve everything people are eating from this conversation. I've actually haven't done MDMA yet. People say that that's something I would enjoy a lot because my brain is, I think, natural on MDMA.
Speaker B: I'd recommend it for sure.
Speaker A: For sure. Is that what you do with Gabbie and Valtai? Okay, never mind.
Speaker B: She drugs me.
Speaker A: In general. Why does there seem. Always seem to be drama in the jujitsu world? Like, outside of. Outside of what's going on here? Or is that just.
Speaker B: I think it's universal to anything.
Speaker A: Drama is everywhere. And then drama rises to the surface.
Speaker B: Drama makes the money.
Speaker A: Yeah, I wish there was a little bit less. You have a bunch of, like, we mentioned some of them. You have a bunch of instructionals out. What are some interesting things that you're looking forward to, like, exploring in terms of teaching? So just stand up is your most recent one, right? Yeah. You also have one called power bottom, an inclusive, modern approach to the guard. Yeah, you're tied. What are some other. What are some other ones?
Speaker B: False reap allegations.
Speaker A: False reaper allegations. Yeah. By the way, people talk about powerbot again, hilarious title, but they say it's a really good instructional. Unlike the guard.
Speaker B: Yeah, I tried to. I try to at least be innovative, you know, like everyone else. I feel like ripping off John and Gordon, putting some sort of slant on that. So I'm trying to take sort of a different approach. I think you can actively influence the sport with what you release because people are going to try to emulate that. I think that's those type of instructionals just then up power bottom, like, approaching the sport differently, I think definitely has a positive impact on how people play the game.
Speaker A: Are you working on something now?
Speaker B: Probably a fundamentals course. Just because we're bringing out. We got the white belt program coming in, so I'm trying to develop a fundamentals course along the line of the constraint based learning stuff we were talking about today, like a way to approach learning as a beginner, to sort of speed up the process a bit and not make it as so technique dense, at least have it a bit more fun.
Speaker A: And focusing in on just like examples of problems to solve.
Speaker B: Exactly. Yeah. Approaching jiu jitsu, learning that way. Like, I mean, kids learn quickly through games. I think adults are capable of that to a certain extent as well.
Speaker A: You're releasing that instructional on pre match preparation?
Speaker C: Yes.
Speaker A: What other stuff do you ever think in a body lock pass?
Speaker C: Yeah, I have a hover body lock or rotty lock? Dvd or instructional? Yeah, I had the pre match ritual coming out. I also have, I'm filming how to build athleticism for grappling. I'm just really trying to capture different angles, kind of like the same, you know, what Craig's doing. Try not to do the same thing that everybody else does. You know, there's a ton of wrestling, ton of jujitsu. Instructional. Instructional. So.
Speaker B: And the steroids results are coming out?
Speaker C: Oh, yeah. Yeah. More plates, more dates. You know, Derek, that runs, that hit me up for a blood panel test, like an impromptu. And I did it a few days ago and I believe the results will come out shortly.
Speaker A: Oh, yeah. I do know the results.
Speaker B: What are you betting on, Lex?
Speaker C: We think it's hard. That's hard to believe.
Speaker A: Yeah, it's, it's, yeah, it's very, very impressive. You put me. Yeah. Awkward position here. Do you, do you think you'll face Gordon soon?
Speaker C: I'm open to it. I don't know. I don't know how soon. Maybe in the next six months. I could see me facing him before ADCC Worlds.
Speaker A: I think that's a great rivalry. I think it's a really interesting one.
Speaker C: It's fun for me.
Speaker A: Is there any chance that the two, the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany, get back together? That DDS, under whatever name, gets back together?
Speaker B: No, absolutely not.
Speaker C: Highly unlikely. I mean, we kind of did this to back up Nikki Ryan and we're sticking with our guy.
Speaker A: So what do you think?
Speaker D: Yeah, I think there's just too many personality conflicts for it to really ever work again.
Speaker A: Do you think there will always be war in the world?
Speaker C: War?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker C: Oh, yeah. I think from the, from the beginning of time it's, it's been, you know, some kind of war, some kind of battle, controversy.
Speaker A: It's what helps people evolve until AI, super intelligent AI, becomes way more powerful than humans and humbles all of us with its power before it destroys us.
Speaker C: Well, until it runs out of batteries, I guess I'm screwed.
Speaker A: Get the unplugged. I'm really fortunate to be able to hang out with you, to train with you, and thank you so much for talking today.
Speaker B: That's the best ending.
Speaker A: Thanks for listening to this conversation with Craig Jones, Nikki Rod, and Nikki Ryan. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Miyamoto Musashi. You must understand that there is more than one path to the top of the mountain. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
