Transcription for Ben Askren： Wrestling and MMA ｜ Lex Fridman Podcast #242.mp3:
Full transcript: The following is a conversation with Ben Askren, wrestler, MMA fighter, and a brilliant, opinionated and fun personality in the world of martial arts. And yes, he occasionally likes to talk a little trash. Given his wild online antics and his boxing match with Jake Paul, some people may forget just how dominant he was in the sport of wrestling and in MMA. For most of his career in wrestling, he is a two time NCAA Division one national champion and four time finalist in mixed martial arts. He went undefeated for ten years with a record of 190 before losing to Jorge Masvidal with a flying knee that caught everyone by surprise. He's also into cryptocurrency, disc golf, and is the co host of Flow Wrestling Radio Live. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now here's my conversation with Ben Askren. Before we talk about your incredible wrestling career, your MMA career, let me ask you, I have to ask you, what did you think about the Jake Paul versus Tyron Woodley fight? Well, I thought, I mean, I'm obviously biased. I thought Tyrone wondehen, I had five rounds of three. And again, this, maybe this is my bias in the way I was seeing it. I thought he was more effective with the striking and he was more aggressive. Jake had more volume, but that was the only thing I would give him. And I guess a lot of people just didn't see it that way. They thought he landed significant more punches. I just didn't think really did any damage. It was a split decision. Split decision? Yeah. Were you surprised? Well, so the thing I said when I went in to fight him is that we don't really. Maybe he's good, maybe he's not. We have no, we really have no idea to this point, you know? And so I knew Tyron was a lot better boxing than I was, and so I thought, okay, Tyron's, there's, I think there's a good likelihood that Tyron beats him up, but there's the chance that Jake's kind of good at this. And I think that's kind of what played out is he's kind of good at it. Even if you saw it the way I saw it, he still was impressive in his showing and he, he's obviously put a lot of time into it, so he's, he's not bad, we'll say that much, you know, but isn't it. Surprising to you that like a elite level athlete, combat athlete, lost to somebody who just takes it really seriously, but is nevertheless not elite level? Um hmm. But I think boxing is a really specific rule set. So let's speak about Tyrann, not myself. Tyron had good striking, but obviously it was his first boxing match ever. And within mixed martial arts, you have the fear of the takedown and the fear of the kick and fear of other things to go along with the punching. And so if you look at Tyrone throughout his MMA career, a lot of times what set up his punches were like, level change fakes at a takedown, they dropped. Boom. And then something comes over the top, right? So there's many more elements to worry about in mixed martial arts, whereas boxing, there's only one. It was his first fight. Yes. I thought Hiram was going to win. I thought this was going to happen. But like I said, I mean, it's pretty evident that Jakes, he's not bad at boxing. He's pretty solid. You know, he gets in there and works hard at it, I guess. Out of ten times. How many times do you think Jake wins against Tyron? Against Tyron, they fight again and again and again, like, iteratively. Yeah. So, I mean, I. Part of the thing is. Okay, so Jake's corner said you need a knockout going into the 8th round, right? So I think they thought maybe they're trying to motivate him, but I don't see it that way, because if they were actually thought that he was winning, why would they encourage him to take a dumb risk when Tyron has clearly his knockout power? Right. It's a really stupid coaching philosophy, if that's what you're thinking. So you obviously are thinking, hey, this is actually in the balance. It's competitive. And I feel like Tyron thought maybe he was winning and didn't have the urgency necessary, and so I think there's a chance he turns it up a lot. Hmm. Man, I would want to watch him again before I. So I have this problem with my personality. Here's my personality, Lex. I have an issue with not being able to give really exact answers. So I hate giving you an answer that, like, I don't feel like is 100% calculated. So I would like to see them go once more. Cause I would like to see, hey, can Tyron if. Because if Tyron can turn up the pace and Jay can't handle it, then I think it's an eight one or nine two. Right. Um, if it goes the exact same way, and maybe Tyrone was a close split decision, I'm saying, oh, it's probably close every single time. We're probably gonna get a five to five type of thing, you know, so it's like, I feel like out of one match, it's not totally indicative of what the future is gonna look like. I feel like Tyrone would get a knockout and then you would still be in the same place. Like, not. Not knowing. Not knowing what to predict. Okay, so your fight with Jake Paul, looking back, you have had a little bit of time now. How would you analyze that fight? Well, I mean, the fight specifically, I got cracked with an overhand right. So, I mean, it kind of sucks, I would say. You know, and this is where everyone, like, I really don't care. And everyone's like, why did you turn your reputation? It's like, well, I wanted to do it. I had an enjoyable time training, and in the build up, obviously, I wasn't skillful enough to get the win, but if I even despite the fact that I know what happened, if someone asked me to do it again, I probably would've done it again, you know? And so the way I was thinking about when I was deciding whether to do it or not. Cause I got the offer, it's like, okay, is this money? It can change my life. Yeah, it could. Right? It's not gonna double my net worth, but it's gonna add significantly, make my life easier. Number two is, like, when I was in high school, we used to do boxing matches for free just cause we thought it was fun. We didn't have something going on. Friday night, me and my buddies would get together and we had some boxing goes in my basement and we'd punch each other in the head. So it's like, for something I think is enjoyable and not pay me a whole bunch of money. Yeah, sure, I'll do it. Would you, do you think if you got the rematch, if you did the rematch, would you, what are the odds you win? Okay, let's. Probably not very good. I think he's pretty good, actually. And I'm not very good. And that was probably at a low point for me because. So when I started training for that, I was like, 215 pounds, which is the heaviest I've ever been. I came off my hip surgery. I literally, like, when I said yes, like, I'll do it. Like, I had literally started working out, like, the week before for the first time in my, you know, instance of surgery. Cause I wasn't able to do anything. So could I. Could I perform better? Yeah. But now after watching in box Tyron, like, if you ask me, Ben, can you beat Tyron? Probably. Probably not. I don't think I can beat Tyrone. So. In boxer. Correct. In boxing, yeah. So my chances of beating him, you know, and watching that card, it's like, damn. Like, kind of be fun to box someone who I know sucks, who I know can beat. That's what would be fun, you know? Cause, like, the training, the preparation was fun, but then obviously, I got my butt kicked. That fuck, that sucked. You know? Could I swear on this podcast? Yeah, of course. Okay. Well, I was gonna drop an f bomb. I wasn't quite sure. I thought you sucked. Isa swear. No, no, you could drop all of the f bombs you want. So, preparation wise, do you think you were more prepared for that fight or the Jordan Burroughs exhibition? I mean, like, how did you approach it mentally, you know? Well, the Burroughs thing, I. Obviously, it's okay. So when I retired the first time in 2017, Burroughs was the only current, like, we'll say, really elite level wrestler that I'd never trained with. I was really good friends with Nebraska head assistance coach, still am. And I said, hey, I just want. I'm gonna pay my own way. I wanna come down, train with Jordan. Cause I wanna see what it feels like, you know, I want to get in there and mix it up. I mix it up with David Taylor and Kyle Dake. I mean, there's just something about wrestling that I love. And so I flew myself down there in January of 2018, and I spent four days training with Jordan. It was a really good time. It gave me some great insight into how he thinks, and, you know, what a great champion he is. What was it like training with him? Like, what. Can you give some insights? Of course. Like, what the. Like, how hard is. Is the live training? Is it more drilling? Is it technical? Like, how does his. It seems like his style is very different than yours. So how does that match up in the room in terms of, like, what you learned from each other? That kind of thing? We only went full live for one, I think was like a twelve or 15 minutes go where it was just go wrestle. We did a bunch of simulated live, but obviously he had. So I was a senior in college when he was a freshman in Nebraska, and so our teams had dueled each other. He was obviously a lot smaller at that point in time, but he had followed my career. And so when I went in there, it was like, hey, I know you're really good at this position. What about this position? What are you trying to do? How exactly does it work? And then let's wrestle there, you know, and then, hey, what about this position? And so, you know, we would spend 30 to 40 minutes talking about that position. On the ground, or it was like one was a chest rap, one wasn't for headlock, one. Washington. I don't really. It's called the. We call it the lightning dump, but it's a lightning dump. Yeah. My buddy's name was lightning Luke Smith in high school, and he was the first person I saw do it. So usually when I see someone do something, then I named that move after them. Got it. I know, right? Great name. It's a good. So, uh. Yeah, but so what I said with that is like, he was still trying to be the best in the world. I was just trying to go work out Jordan Burrows, because I enjoy wrestling. Yeah. Is like, someone who, at that point, when he has five world titles, at that, four or five. At that point, a lot. And so I use it with my high school kids, is like, hey, this is a guy who's the best in the world, who's bringing someone in and saying, how do I do this? How do I do that? What about this? What about that? And so the level of inquisitive. Inquisitive, that's a hard word. Inquisitiveness he has is really impressive. And then it's obvious why he got to the level he did, because he's figuring out all these little situations, and that's a, honestly, one of the biggest things I think wrestlers, a lot of wrestlers fail to do as they get older, even when they get to early college age, they say, this is my style. This is what I do. I'm going to lift and work out hard, and I'm. And I'm not going to anything to my game, you know, whereas you've seen many progressions in Jordan Burrows game, he just made his 10th world team. And you and I, you know, if you have a really keen eye, you've been able to watch him change. You know, I've been watching him since 2007. He's changed so much and obviously still maintained a world class level almost the entire time. When you say change, like, what changed? Cause he's got that double leg, but. There'S not double anymore. What's that? He, like, hit his double leg for the first time against Alex Deirdre. He hadn't hit it in years. Yeah. So that's, like, when people think about Jordan Bros. They think about the double leg. Cause in his early years, fire. He had a great double leg. Right. And even so, in those years, I would say the. The biggest thing with Jordan Bros. Double leg wasn't his level of explosiveness. It was his level of persistence. He would shoot and shoot and shoot and shoot. And it would last time to be from fun, creative angles and out of scrambles. Boop. All of a sudden, he's on you, you know, and just. He was just super persistent with it, and I think that was probably the key. And then you saw, you know, when he came out to won the first world championships in 2011, it was kind of that type of mentality. And then shortly after, then obviously, everyone was starting to lower their stance, getting lower. And he developed a really good, like, mantis go behind series where he would go one way, the other way. Then he started developing really good, like, low single ankle pick type thing, you know? And then his hand. His hand fighting got really tremendous. Like, 15, 1617. His hand fighting was really good. And now I just commented, the 21 trials, like, a few of the defensive sequences he got into, it's like, holy shit. Like, just not from an athletic standpoint, from a technical standpoint, the things he were doing was just tremendous. So I've seen him as someone, like, who's continuing to reinvent themselves over the course of the last 1012 years, especially. As a junior and senior in college, you were exceptionally dominant. If you were to face him at both of your peaks of NCAA wrestling, could you beat him? And if you can beat him, of course you can beat him. How do you solve the Jordan Burroughs puzzle? Well, so for a folk style wrestling standpoint. Folk style? Yes, folk style. You know, he. He had some competitive matches. His junior, senior year. He had a two one win over, or maybe three two over Michael Chandler, who was my teammate who's fighting UFC now. He had a two and one over title called. Well. So I think you can glean some insight into that. You know, he got ridden. He got so mad about this up on the podcast. So during Krono, we had to make up all kinds of bullshit to talk about. Yeah. And we were doing, like, the last ten years best one hundred sixty five s. And I said Kyle Dake would ride him for over a minute. Oh, wow. He got so mad, he wanted to come on the podcast the next day. So hopefully he doesn't listen to this. Fuck you, Mandev. You know, but, you know. When was this? This is during Corona. Corona last year. He got mad. We were talking about. We were. Before the trials. Yeah, correct. Yeah. So Michael Chandler wrote him for two minutes plus, and that was his junior year, not a senior year. Sure. Right. But it's close. So I think there's some things there. I think the interesting thing would be, if I would have stuck around. Right. So I chose to go into mixed martial arts after 2008, I would've been 74, and he would've been 74, so we would have to wrestle. And then I think that the freestyle Jordan Burroughs puzzle is a lot more difficult to solve than the folk style Jordan Burroughs puzzle. And I think. I don't think he would. I think he would acknowledge that he's much better at freestyle than he was at folk style. You know, although he was very good. He's better. This is, like, raw speed, explosiveness, present a problem to you. Well, so he was never. I mean, he didn't really excel on the mat in kind of either style. In freestyle, he has got some good lace transitions, but in folks that, like, his whole. Like, in his entire college career, I think he has, like, ten pins, which is almost nothing, you know? So he was gaining no value off the top position. He was good enough on most people to get off bottom without it being an issue, but it wasn't like, oh, my gosh, this is an area where we really have to be careful. There's a lot of things here, you know, it's just. He wasn't gaining value there. Whereas in freestyle, he. I don't want to say never, but the amount of times he gets turned is incredibly rare. Very, very rare. Um, and he does have, like, laser transitions, so he gets a lot of points there, so. And obviously, freestyle is. It can be geared way more in the neutral position. Right, where we're only doing takedowns, so. Yeah. Were you surprised that he lost to Dake in the trials? To Kyle Dake? No, Kyle's so. So he's so good. Right? I mean, I think. I think his performance at the Olympics was. Was his loss then was shocking to. I mean, we never seen it happen to Kyle Dake. You know, he's been a guy who's competed with Jordan Burroughs forever, and obviously, he was on the losing side for a while, and now he's on the winning side. But I think a lot of people thought it was a coin flip, and I think, actually, Kyle Dick made it feel like it's not a coin flip now. To me, it feels like Kyle Digg is going to win that match significantly more times than he isn't, is what it feels like. Yeah. I forgot which trials it was. Was it four years ago, or Kyle Dake threw him? Like, he. You saw inklings of, like, oh, wow. There might be eventually a changing of the guard. Yeah. So, 13, Kyle came out, and he had the one throw, but then he lost one of the matches decisively. And then he was hurt in 14. And in 16, Kyle Digg actually went up to 86 kg. So in. Actually in 16 at the trials, we had. So Jake Herbert was number one seed. He was former as Guy Russell. I was a former world silver medalist. So you had David Taylor, who had not made a team yet, who is now a world champion, Olympic champion. You had Kyle Dake in the bracket, who was a two time world champion now. And you had Jayden Cox in the bracket, who had not made any teams yet, but is now, what, a four time world medals, two time world champion. And then obviously, Jaden came out on top of that, won his first Olympic medal, Olympic bronze medal. So Kyle didn't wrestle Jordan in 16, and Jordan and Kyle's contention the whole time. And they argued about this. So I actually did a little bit of backstabbing. Well, it's not backstabbing. And both of them were just one of them. I didn't tell any of them. Okay, so Jordan got mad when we talked. We talked about this fake match for in Krona, right? Yeah, we had to make. We had to make up something to talk about. Yeah, there's obviously no matches. So we talked about this fake match. And do you stand behind that statement, by the way? Here's what I said. Kyle, Dick, Kyle Dick's four time NCAA champion. Yes. I said, you gotta pick a. You gotta pick a winner. I said, Kyle Dick wins two one on a minute and six ride time, which, I mean, is literally, we're talking as close as it gets. As close as it gets for Kyle Dick, who's a four time NCAA champion. I'm sorry. We're talking over Jordan Burroughs, over Jordan. Burrows in a folks now match. In a folks down match. College or hypothetical now or in college? In college. Both of them at their peaks at 165 pounds. So completely hypothetical. And so Jordan called in. He was all pissed at me for picking Kyle Dake. He wants to come on the next day and argue his point. So I said, f that. That's dumb. We had to pick a winner. We had to do something hypothetical. So I called Kyle Dake and I said, kyle, jordan's gonna come on and argue his case in the morning. If he's gonna do that, why don't you come in and argue your case? So no one else knew Kyle was coming on the podcast. So they both show up. They went at it. But one of the contentions Kyle had for years, and there's still this rule. If you win a world level medal the following year, you sit out until the very end of the american trials, and they do a best two or three. So every time. Previously that Kyle had wrestled Jordan, he had to come through a tournament on Saturday. Okay, probably three matches. And then on Sunday, he would wrestle Jordan in the best two out of three. Right. So his contention was, I'm only wrestling Jordan at a disadvantage because I have to compete on Saturday. And then competing, which. It's a fair argument, it really is. But I also see USA Wrestling's point is, like, if someone wins a world medal, we're going to reward them because we want that person on the team again. So it's crazy, though, that you're like, Kyle Dake had to wrestle because he's not wrestling bums in that. Bums, yeah. And, yeah. I don't know. I don't know how wrestlers do it, because you have to go to war, like, three matches and then face Jordan Burrows. Especially a few of those years with Dake had the name Andrew Howe, but those were really competitive matches. David Taylor had really competitive matches with him. Isaiah Martinez even got in there, Dearinger. So he had some really competitive matches before he ever got to Jordan Burroughs. So I never answered. Your initial question was, how did I feel? So the Jordan Burroughs match, I was nothing in wrestling shape at all, meaning wrestling's heavily dependent, especially neutral positions, heavily dependent on timing and other things. I was wrestling very, very minimally. Cause I was. I started fighting again. So, like, my. My athletic shape was great, but it was mainly for fighting. I wasn't wrestling. So I think they were actually trying to do Burroughs Dake at the beat the streets. It's a big. It's the biggest fundraisers in wrestling every. Single year in New York. In New York City, usually raise, like, a million dollars. They started all these programs in New York City to get. Which I really wonder what they're doing with the money now, because they probably can't have the kids wrestling because New York's crazy. Anyway, I think New York figures out a way what to do with the money. Hence Michael malice complaining that they're corrupt and all that. Well, no, but it goes to the beat the streets organization, who then starts the clubs in New York. So I don't know what to do with my. Anyway, so I was called, like, I don't know, two, two weeks before the event, and said, hey, you know, someone says to wrestle Jordan Burroughs, it fell out. Would you wrestle him? I said, yeah, sure, why not? You know, and it's like, listen, I trained with them for four days the year before. I had a pretty good idea how the match was going to go. It wasn't going to go so well for me, but it's like, okay, you're missing a main event I can bring because of where I'm at right now in my life. I can bring a lot of attention to wrestling. I can help you guys raise a bunch of money for beat the streets. My goal is, I think I thought I could get one takedown or turn on him was kind of my goal for the match. I didn't get there. You weren't kind of hard. He went hard. Yeah. Asshole. Give me a point. Yeah. I said, this is bullshit, jordan. I told him during the match, like, this is bullshit. You're fucking going too hard right now. I'm not a wrestler. I'm not a wrestler anymore. I'm a fighter. I'm coming in here. So, yes, I had a really good idea. I mean, we wrestled together. I think he'll probably get mad because I think in the live go, we did like the twelve or 15 minutes. I think I actually scored a takedown in that, I believe. Maybe. Or maybe it was a turn. He'll probably say, no, I didn't. But whatever. Yeah. So I knew what was going to happen. I knew what the outcome was going to be. I knew I could. I was hoping to stay competitive and maybe lose like ten too, or something. Yeah. Well, let's walk back. Cause I think I originally brought it up in terms of how prepared were you against Jake Paul versus Jordan Burrows? So did you prepare for Jake cardio wise? Yeah, I worked hard. Yeah, I did. But it was like I told you, I started training for my. I mean, once. Once I had my hip surgery, they said, you know, for the first six weeks, you can't even walk. And it was hard for me to listen to him. Cause by week four and a half, five, I was feeling pretty good. I wanna get rid of my crutches, but I'm like, you know what? This is for the rest of my life. And if you get the. So if you get the real hip replacement, there's no wrestling, there's no nothing. Right? So that's the next step. So, okay, I'm gonna take this year. So I do my crutch of the six weeks, the next six weeks, it's still like really low weight bearing. Can't do anything, you know. So then I get done with the three months, which is like January, and I'm like, okay, I should start working out. So I started riding bike a little bit. And then, okay, I'm now I'm fat. I'm fucking fat. I'm gonna get in better shape because I don't do anything. So I'm actually start working out, and. And then that happened, right? So I'm like, okay, well, now I got three months and gives me a good reason to get back in shape. And, you know, I knew I wasn't going to be a full time boxer. So it's like, okay, how do I put a boxing camp together? So I found, you know, I had had my old teammate Mike Rhodes. He came up and kind of lived with me ish kind of thing for three months. I found a couple of this guy, canine, out of Michigan. He came over three weeks. He was great. I went to Freddie roach for a week. So I kind of like, you know, try to get as many good as ideas as I could. And my thought was like, okay, well, if this dude sucks, I can just be tough and, you know, block a few punches, get him tired, and then beat him up if he's good. That's probably not much of my due bout in the next three months. Cause I'm. I was never good at boxing in the first place. All of my standup in mixed martial arts was predicated on how do I get through the two or three punches that are gonna come at me in the time I need to get ahold of them. You know, it's only, you only have to make two or three of them miss, and then, boom, you're on top of them. At least for me. Um, that was all my striking was predicated on. It wasn't about, hey, I'm gonna do damage on the feet in order to make something else happen. It was like, how do I clear this barrier, get ahold of you, and if you. I actually did the math one time. I think I got a takedown. If you include the knockout round against Mas Vidal, I gotta take down in every round except two. So it was like, it was like 53 out of 55 rounds in MMA, I gotta take down. Wow. Somewhere. Somewhere in there. Okay, so you're hunting to take down. Once you. Once, right away, once you get a your hands on them, you get to take down. Okay. But the incredible thing about you, I just recently talked, spent a couple of days with Jimmy Pedro, and he talked about his guys and just champions in general, hating to lose more than they love winning. And the way you talked about losing, you lost very few times in your career. Like, later, you were dominating both wrestling and MMA. But the way you took these losses against people that are, I don't know, below elite level. It's fair, but it's completely fair. I thought he was a bum too. No, that's not what I meant. I'm in trouble. It's okay. No, it's good. No, but like what. Can you explain the psychology behind that? Is there a system behind this? Is there a philosophy behind this? Well, I wasn't very good in the beginning. And I think that. I think that's where it all starts from. So I didn't start getting good until the age of like 13. I started at five. I probably started competing more at age 1011. I didn't really get good till 13. And still at 13, I'm selling. I'm great. I'm getting better, right? I'm pretty good. So actually I've actually I have writing this book on sports psych. But I got someone writing for me kind of thing. Cause I've had this philosophy for years that there's. There has to be this balance between two things, right? So on the one hand, in this category. On the one hand you have hating to lose. A great champion has to hate to lose, like you said, right? But on this other hand, you have to have someone who seeks out challenges, right? Cause if you don't have that, you're never gonna reach your full potential either. And so you have to balance these two balls at the same time, right? And so, like for me, I always. And this is maybe because I wasn't good, but I was always like, let me go find the best people to wrestle all the time. Let me go find. I would like literally like 7th grade when I was starting to get better, it was like end decision Internet. Well, there was no one was using the Internet. It was like a wrestling magazine. And like, hey dad, there's a tournament here, I think that other kids gonna be there. Can you take me 2 hours across the state today, please? You would wrestle like in competition against them? Not in competition. Yeah, yeah, in competition. Hey, I heard there's this tournament. Here's the magazine says this tournament. Hey, dad, will you take me over there tomorrow? You weren't trying to win, you were trying to get the experience. I was trying to wrestle the best guys. Maybe I win, maybe I lose. There's no. When you do a competition, there's no guarantee of a win or a loss. You're just doing competition, right? So I wanted to go. I wanted to challenge myself against the best guys, of which I thought maybe I could come out on top, right? So like 8th grade year, I won way, you know, I probably lost a handful of times in the state of. Well, the state of Wisconsin was probably really, really minimal, the amount of times I lost, you know, but it was just about getting the challenge. And it's like some kids and not kids in my club, because I'll push them very hard on this, are scared of challenging themselves. They like being the big fish in the small pond. They're not willing to go say, I'm gonna. I wanna go get that guy, and I wanna get that guy, and I wanna get that guy. And so that's like. So I think that's part of it for me, is, like, I always just love the challenge. I enjoyed competing thoroughly. Right. And I understood from a young age because it wasn't very good. Losing is a part of it. You're not always gonna win. And that was kind of it. It's like, hey, sometimes, you know, and for my MMA career, I never planned it to go that way, but, yeah, I didn't lose for nine years. And, like, that's. That's pretty rare. I didn't plan for that to happen. That was just what happened. Okay, but you also didn't lose, like, the second part of your college career. My 87. I won my last 87 matches. Yeah. So that didn't come along with the hatred of losing. You just. I don't like losing. I still don't like it. Yeah, yeah. Okay. But you don't. You don't seem to. You seem to kind of shrug it off a little bit. Okay. So, like. But specifically with these two instances that you bring up with the masvidal, it feels definitely so. Okay. All right, let's go. Let's go deep. Let's keep the masvidal one. It feels different because. So let's. For people don't know, masvidal loss was your first loss, first loss in MMA. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And, I mean, it was a dramatic loss. Very dramatic. And there was this kind of buildup as you are potentially one of the greats of all time coming into this fight. And so this pressure, all of that. So then, no, I mean, I was thoroughly enjoying it. I didn't feel the pressure. So the Masvidal fight is he got one fucking move on me. It's not. He beat me. And if we do that again, I think I win at that point in my life, for sure. I think I win way, way, way more times than I lose. He knew that, too. That's why he didn't want. He didn't want to sound the battle agreement. That's why I had to taunt him and why he got so mad, because I had to continue to taunt him in order to get him to sign. Right. So that one hurt, because, as people don't know my career, I'll just go through it fast. I did three fights in, like, smaller leagues. I got signed by Bellator. I was undefeated for three and a half years. I was nine and odd when I got done with that in 2012, 2013. At that point in my head, I was just going to transition to the UFC. Cause that's where you go. I was ranked, like, six in the world. I hadn't really had a competitive match at the end of the Bellator thing. And Dana White, for a reason still unknown to me, we still haven't had this conversation. I wish I could ask him. I should ask him sometime. Chose to refuse me any entry into UFC. He just said, I went to his office, and he literally said, we're not interested. We're not going to make you an offer. Did you mention something about him, about the UFC? That was a year before that. That was a year before. And that might play a role in it? I think so, yes. What happened the year before that was I called him a liar. But listen, I'm right on this one, because he said, you can't test for drugs. Cause I'm all natural, which you could tell by my physique. And I was always put off by the fact that so many people cheated. And I was very vocal about that. And so he had made some statement like, oh, there's no way you could test. I said, bullshit. Very specifically. I said, USAdA does it for all other sports worldwide. You can do it. And then it's funny. Cause they hired Usada a couple years later. So I think he took some offense to that. But that was like a year and almost a year and a half. I think somewhere it was later. It's not like he holds a grudge or anything. Yeah, so I. So I literally go to Vegas. It's a long story. You can read about it other places. So I got released from a belt. It's not like this is negotiation. I got released from my bellator contract. I said, I'm out of here. I'm going. I'm going to the UFC. I go to Vegas. And then I was told, hey, there's no offer for you. Tough shit, you know? So then I ended up signing with one championship. I spent, what, three and a half years there. I won the belt in my second fight and retained the title the entire time. And then I just. You get dominating people yeah, I didn't. Have a competitive fight, and so I retired 18 and o. Never, never get. And for someone who loves a challenge, never getting to really challenge myself was incredibly frustrating. And I left the door open. I said, if I ever get the chance to prove them in this world, I'd love to come back. So somehow, a year later, I get traded. Trades have never happened, and this is the one and only trade ever. I've been retired for a year. I got traded. I get to come back. I fight Robbie Lawler the first fight I win, and then essentially they're saying, okay, if you fight, you know, if you beat George, you're gonna get the title shade against Marty. And it's like, this is, this is what I've been working for the entire. I've been trying to prove I was the best part of the world for the last ten years, and I've not been afforded this opportunity. So when I lost to George, that was hard because it was something that I had waited for for a really, really long time. It was something that I, you know, I thought I could compete for, and I never got the opportunity to do. So that one was hard at the same time from, like, just the competitive logistics. Like, he got me with one move. It wasn't like he beat my ass for 15 minutes, and I got beat a bunch of different ways. So that was like, fuck. Like, if I get it again, I could have done it, but I'm not. I'm not. They're not going to let me have it again. It's not like wrestling, where you could go the next year or the next week or whatever. You know, you lose a big tens, you go to nationals two weeks later. Does that loss change you in any way? Your psychology? I don't. I don't think so. It's the first loss. I mean, had I had I had a longer mma career post, that there definitely would have been a lot of time spent getting better at the entry point to the takedown. Right. Which I'd already spent time there. And I hate making excuses, but, yeah, the hip, the hinging of my hip, what I couldn't do was preventing me from doing some things. And it's why, if you look at the fight, I'm, like, bent over as I go for the double leg. Yeah. So I. What happened for people who don't know, you went in for a double legged knee, he did a flying knee. And that, and the way he caught you, well, specifically the way he did that knee was kind of different than the way anyone had thrown, flying knees before. Most people go more just from a stand straight vertical, whereas he took a few, like, running steps and went more, you know, the trajectory of the angle was different. So I think that's kind of probably why it caught. You know, I think a lot of things in combat, well, probably everything, but I focus on happen subconsciously. Like, our brain is reading what's coming at us, and lots of times it's stuff we've seen before so we can judge how to move correctly. You misread because it's something you haven't seen before. Had not seen anyone come at that specific angle. Yeah, so that also was really hard with the Burroughs one. I told you I knew I was gonna lose. So it was like, whatever, you know, I'm taking this because I want to put this for wrestling out there in a big way. I wanna help them raise a lot of money. We sold at Madison Square Garden, Hulu theater, and we raised a whole bunch of money. So my goals were accomplished. Jake Paul fight. I took it because they paid me a bunch of money. I thought it was gonna be fun. Did I have any illusion I was a great boxer? No illusions whatsoever. Would I have preferred to win? Absolutely. But, you know, like I told everyone, whether I win or lose on Saturday night, I'm gonna be back coaching wrestling on Monday. Cause that's what I enjoy doing. And I was back coaching wrestling on Monday. And once in a while, these middle school kids give me a little bit of shit about it, and that's it. But where were you in terms of your shape and how you felt in the Masvidal fight? Would you say you're on the. I mean, it's a difficult question to ask of a world class athlete, but, like, were you past peak? Oh, yeah. I don't know why guys like to lie about that. I mean, the peak for me was really, evidently, in my late twenties, and maybe they are all fueled by extra supplements, I don't know. But for me, that was evident. But you get this. So you get this crosshair where you're. If you're smart, like, you know, like I mentioned Joan Burrows was, you're still gaining wisdom, you're gaining strategy, gaining a lot of things right. And so while your physicality may go down, your overall skill level still may be rising, especially in MMA, because people usually start later. Cause they're gaining wisdom, strategy, all of the maybe more tools in their toolbox, right. They're getting all these things. So their actual competitive peak, despite their athletic peak going down, might still be a few years past that, right? Because these things are crossing. No. So I thought I was great. Obviously, the hip was an issue. It's funny because I knew I had a lot of pain here, and I knew it was because of this, and it was like, okay, whenever I'm done, I'll just get it taken care of, whatever. But every time I train, I would have pain kind of, like, all up my back. And the day after the surgery, I woke up and there was no pain on the right side of my surgery. On the left side, there's no pain on the right side of my back. That's fucking weird. Like, every. Every morning I wake up, there's a lot of pain there, you know? Um. Like, okay, well, I'm on pain pills. Maybe it'll. Maybe it'll come back tomorrow. And this. That's never. Never been back since my. Oh, wow. So it was weird because it was like this. I thought this was affecting this, but it was affecting all the way across my whole back. So, you know, if I get to get a new hip, honestly, if I. If I. I don't know if it's gonna change the competitive outcome whatsoever. If I had known how good the hip replacement was gonna be, I would have done it. The second I retired from one championship in November of 2017, I would have my hip surgery scheduled for December 1. Just from a lifestyle standpoint. I could only sleep in one position. There was a lot of things I couldn't do. I was in a lot of pain, so I would have done that a lot earlier. But no, from a athletic point, I was ready. This shit goes wrong sometimes. I don't know how to ask this, but, you know, Joe Rogan Mehden had a sense about you, similar to, like, Fedor, that you are potentially one of the greatest ever. Yeah. Does it hurt that you're not in the discussion now of being in the top ten of all time? I didn't prove it. I don't deserve it. I mean, but I didn't. I didn't prove it. I mean, and so it's like, had I. Had I somehow gotten to convince Dana White, we go and convince him in 2013 to make me an offer, and I didn't even need a good offer. I needed any offer. Had I gotten the offer, then maybe the outcome's different. Right? But given I would never expect anyone to think of me that way. I didn't prove it. I know what I was, and I'm good with that. And, yeah, other people never got to see that. Well, you don't know. You can't know fully. Right. Do you think if you went to the UFC at that time, instead of one championship? I think I would have a lot of success. Yeah. I mean, there's obviously certain guys, there's a lot of guys I've trained with that I had a lot of really good results against. And who was Walter Waite at that point? Tyron was the champion for a long time there, so I was around. Tyron was a champion. Anthony was the champion at lightweight. I was, you know, same gym as him, and we had a lot of people coming through. Yeah. Would you face Tyron? Would I have fought him? I don't think so. I mean, so he was still the champion when I came into the UFC and we said, no, we're not gonna fight. All right. Hey. So you can't change history, right? So once something happens, you gotta accept for what it is and move forward, and obviously, hope you can continue to keep accomplishing great things, which, for me, obviously, my athletic career's over, so now it's gonna be through my wrestling academies and, you know, who knows what else I get into. Oh, you might do exhibition matches, all that kind of stuff, right? Statue wrestling and stuff? No, I don't think so. So here's my thing with the wrestling matches, is, like, just for fun, if you said, hey, Ben, just for fun. Yeah. Would you love to go wrestle someone? Yeah, I would. I would. Right? I love. I love wrestling. I get in there. I love, you know, I love, like, so one of my guys has gotten to be pretty good. He's in college, Kegan O'Toole. He just won a junior world title this year. And so when. When I'm doing private lessons, I have such a thing about the development of the athlete. Sometimes I can wrestle hard, but most of the time, it's like, I'm just gonna help them with whatever they need help with. And it's still wrestling and it's fun, but it's helping them, you know, for, like, rake comes back this summer and he's trained for the junior world title. So to be able to just shake hands sometimes and say, like, I'm gonna try to kick your ass. You try to kick my ass? You know, like, just to go, like. Yeah, it's a good feel. It's so much fun, and I don't get to do that very much. So if you said, ben, would you love to do some matches? And the answer is, yeah. The problem, unfortunately for me, and maybe you could talk me off a ledge here, is, like, because of where I've gotten to my career. If I choose to do a wrestling match, it's gonna. People are gonna be really excited about it. It's gonna blow up, and it's like, I just want to wrestle. Just to wrestle. I'd rather just, like, go in a room where no one can watch and just wrestle. Just enjoy it. Well, you could also wrestle. So there's different kinds of wrestling. There's wrestling with this, an event, and, like, you know, there's a build up and an announcement. Yeah. And you can also do, like, khabib style. Like, in the room, there's cameras, and you're kind of going. It's like, wait, khabib does that? No, in. Marcel did that. He whooped my ass a few times. Yeah, exactly. I mean, I've seen khabib, some videos. It's not, like, set up. It's just people going hard, and then it's more fun. Yeah. You know, and it's. It's also more like presenting the beauty of the sport. Yeah. You know, for sure. And, like. And there's no winning or losing, really, in that context. Yeah. Like, you're just. You're always joking around a little bit, even when you go super hard. So I feel like, especially in the modern day, with. With the Internet, that's a compelling way to do. So I've thought about. This is the one thing I've had thought about doing. Cause I told you about my buddy who has the content thing. It's called Rock Finn. I thought about doing, you know, the old, really famous Gracie challenge. Yeah. Okay. So I thought about doing the Askren challenge. You wanna hear my rule set? Yeah. Let's go. I'm not sure I'm gonna do this. People are gonna show up to your, like, in Wisconsin. I have to select you. I'll start with $1,000. Right. Okay. 30 minutes. You pin me or I pin you. That's it. No points, no nothing. We just wrestle. Camera. That's it. Right. It's camera in the room. Maybe. Maybe there's a referee. Cause we don't want there to be contention over the pin. So one pin. Just one pin. 30 minutes. 30 minutes. Okay. If I pin you, you don't get shit, you go home. Right. Every person I pin, it goes up by $1,000. 20, 00, 30, 00, 40, 00, 50, 00, and so on. If you make it the distance and I don't pin you and you don't pin me, I'll pay for your travel and give you $500. Right. Just a consolation prize for showing up if you pin me, you get whatever the jackpot is. Wait, who's adding to the jackpot? I am. It's mine. It's my money. But then what's the incentive to keep winning for you? Because the jackpot, well, because I would. Put the content somewhere people would watch it. Oh, so you're gonna make money. Yeah, so you'd make money. That way it's not exponentially growing, right. It's just going up by like, yeah. I really think there's probably only a couple people that could pin me. So I would either just not choose those people or wait till I get a really large audience and people get really excited. In that case, I'm making a lot of money. So what do you think? How many matches would go with you? Like, Khalid shows up. I don't think he could pin me. Yeah, so Jordan Burrows. Jordan Burroughs could beat me, but he can't pin me. He was never a pinner. Yeah, he ain't gonna pin me. There's only a few people who have the skill level to do so. Right. It takes a lot. Cause that was so pinning was one of my specialties, I admit, the fourth most of all time. And I won the pinning award the last two years. So you down on points and just pin them? This is actually one of the issues I have with jiu jitsu and the point system and the Eddie Bravo thing. I actually think Eddie Bravo things kind of, people get so mad at me. Sorry, jujitsu. I think it's bullshit. And you want me to tell you why it's bullshit? Yes. So, like, if Jordan Burroughs whoops my ass and the score is 16 to two, but he can't pin me, then I get to go to overtime and get a cradle on him. I'm probably going to pin him. So I'm better than Jordan Burroughs. Nah, that ain't right. He just whooped my ass. Do you know what I'm saying? Like, if we can go the whole cause they do submission only. So if Jordan Bros. Beats me up for, what's it, eight minutes, ten minutes? I don't know. What's the length of an Eddie Bravo match? Yeah, I don't know, something like that. Yeah. So we go ten, me and Joan Burrows, ten minutes. He's going to outscore me significantly. But he will not pin me. I promise you that. Okay, so now we go, we go to the overtime. Strong words. But yeah, he won't. Jordan Bros. Is not going to. He's going to beat me. I will give you that. Kyle Dake won't pin you either. No. Okay. Okay. They will both beat me on points very badly. Now, David Taylor, he might, he might pin me because he's a very good pinner. Also. They'll beat me very badly. They will not pin me. But now we get to overtime and we get to pick like, right. So in a Bravo, you get a rear naked choke or an armbar. Okay, give me a cradle. I'll probably pin them. Okay. A good cradle, you can say cradle or maybe give them. They're not. Probably not going to pin me, right? Maybe, maybe there's a chance, but probably not because that's not their specialty. So for people who don't know, the Eddie Bravo thing is when it goes into overtime, you get a Dominus position on a person and you get to. Yeah, basically put them in a cradle. This is the wrestling equivalent. Yeah, but you take their back. Maybe an arm bar. Yeah, wrestling arm bar. And I don't think that's very fair because if someone whoops your ass, they whip your ass and then, you know. And so I think the reason why jujitsu people accept that rule set is that. I don't think, I think they know this, but would admit it. I don't think they're. Their point scoring system at a clue attic adequately rewards what people value. So like in wrestling, we value takedowns cause it gets closer to the pin and the most valuable scoring is a near fault, near to the pin because that's the ultimate goal of the sport. Whereas in jiu jitsu, for example, like if I were to get a taKedown, so like if I went to Gordon Ryan and he just didn't pull guard, I would probably get the takedown. Now if somehow he didn't submit me, which he probably would, right, but say he got, got close to like twelve submissions, but somehow I slipped out of all of them. Now I win 20. Like that's ridiculous. Like he should very clearly win. Cause he almost submitted, you know what I'm saying? Like there. And I, and I realized the difficulty, I realized the difficulty in rewarding near submissions. But that is the most valuable thing is getting close to finishing the match. And in most competitions they don't actually reward that. But, okay, so this isn't about the sport. This is about the Ben Askren challenge that we're talking about. Okay. Why 30 minutes? Why not unlimited time? Hmm? Why, why go until whenever? Well, cause then it's just a cardio thing. Cause at some point then someone would just have to fall over dead, right. There's no more skill level involved. It's just. Who can stand up the longest? You honestly don't think 30 minutes is a cardio thing, too? How do you think that's actually gonna look, kyle, date going against you for 30 minutes? So it's gonna be kind of boring for the most part. What position are you going to be? But you just can't have a gigantic amount of action for 30 minutes. So I relate it, because some of my kids, when teaching them wrestling, they're like, well, but I can't do that for seven minutes. And I'm like, well, you know, say, if I had you do hand cleans at a relatively heavy weight as hard as you could, you're not going to last seven minutes. Your pace will slow down. Right. So my thing is like, well, your pace doesn't have to step here, because in wrestling, you're competing against someone. So if you're here at 100 and you go to 80, but they go to 70, that's great. And now you go to 60, but they go to 40. This is even better. Right? Because the gap is growing. So we don't necessarily. If we get tired, that's fine. If they get more tired, that's better. So I think most people would know that. So they would kind of slow it down. Um, but, yeah, I think in third, I mean, I've wrestled 30 minutes goes. I've wrestled, I've wrestled hour long goes, um, you're not gonna get so tired, you're gonna fall over in that time period. But at some point, if we. If it's unlimited, someone will get so tired that are dehydrated that they're just gonna freaking fall over. Yeah, but you think, what about making it exciting and dynamic? You think the other person is always going to be going for the pin and thereby make it dynamic. Well, if they were working that hard, then they might exhaust themselves. Right. And obviously, then if you're. If you're being that dynamic, then you're adding risk to yourself, too, because you are the, you know, doing that. Well, I love this. This is a great idea. Well, I figured I'd get. I rack up, like, 20 pins against bums, you know, or not. Not as great people in the beginning. And then I would start bringing in better people. Cause they would be enticed by, you know, $20,000, the possibility to win, and. Not much fanfare, just a camera and just local. That's it in my wrestling room. Yeah. Yeah. Like the Gracie challenge. Yes. Yeah. And so then maybe you have, like, you know, for most people, you have someone edit like the 90 seconds of the most fun things that happen and then you can watch the entire 30 minutes if you want to. Yeah, I mean, I think most people, if they're not really, really elite, I'm probably going to pin them if they're not really elite. So. Yeah, but I don't know, that's something I've been thinking about. This has been like fun for me to think about. Obviously it plays to my skill sets because my cardio is good and I, my pinning is good also. So, yeah, so like you said, you weren't very good in your early days until 1314. What was the switch you became? You started to dominate people in your college career. You dominated and obviously you stopped losing at some point. Yeah, so. Well, I would say so even when I didn't lose in collegiate competition, I would go in the summers and try to make the world team. So I would have lose some, not a lot, right? Minimally. Okay, so when I'm five, I start playing all sports. Like, I know you moved to America at what age? 13. Okay, so five. So at least, I don't know what it was for you, but in America at my age, you usually played like a sport every season, right? So that's what I did. In the beginning, I had minimal success in wrestling. I was kind of chunky. And then now in fifth grade, I cant tell you I want to be better. And I told my parents, and this is funny because now I look at other eleven year olds and very few of them are this mature. And I actually think emotional maturity is kind of one of the key indicators of how long term successful someones going to be. And at age eleven I said I dont want to play baseball. I like baseball, but I dont want to play baseball because I want to wrestle more because I want to get better at wrestling. So age eleven, I quit baseball so I could wrestle in a club for March, April and may because that was all that existed at that point in time. You couldn't wrestle in June, July or August, any of those other months. What was that desire to get better? What is it? So it's not about, I don't know. Where it came from. I just want to get better. I want to get better. I want to be good at this. I want to be really good at this. So when you're looking at kids now as a coach, you're looking for that somebody who says, you know what, I kind of suck. I want to get better and I want to try to also inspire that. I mean, honestly, I think as a coach, that's probably my. My biggest job is to get a kid and get them to believe I can do this. Cause if I can do this, what can. I can do that, I can do that too. Right? And there's so many kids who unfortunately have, like, shitty parents or bad teachers that tell them, you suck. You can't be anything, right? So I think my biggest goal as a coach is to get someone to believe they can do it. So, actually, some of the ones that believe they can do it, they're the most fun, but they're not the ones who need it the most, right? The ones who think they can are the ones that need me the most. I need someone to. Let's go. Um, so I don't. I don't know what inspired me. I'm not sure. So age. At age eleven, fifth grade, I quit. I start. So then I started having more success. You know what I'm like, say, placing at the state tournament, um, in high school. Uh, so you. You write fifth. So 6th grade, I placed it, like, the state local u state tournament, you know, so I'm like, having more success. 7th grade was the first year I won the youth state tournament. Um, so I'm getting better. 8th grade, I actually feel like I got pretty good, but, like, when I went to the national tournaments, I was still having really minimal success. My freshman year, I decided to quit football. Same reason. It's like, well, I need to put more time into this. My parents, we got. My dad, luckily got a mat in my basement. So, you know, there's no. So we have a year round club, and our impetus was that we didn't have this opportunity to go to a club year round. So we had a mat in my basement, had to go find. Hey, you want to come wrestle? Yeah. To find partners for myself. What'd you do? Did you drill? Did you live wrestle? What'd you do in that basement? So, actually, I think you'll enjoy this. I think the start of my scrambling was, was kind of based around that. So I got kind of. I think it's probably my freshman, sophomore. I'm kind of. The years are a little fuzzy, right. It's been a while, but probably my freshman, sophomore, junior year, I found two kids who were really consistent, who would come out like, you'd come out on. He'd come out on Tuesday and this dude come out on a Wednesday. Right. And they would come every week and they were really consistent partners for me to have in the summer, but they weren't nearly as good as me, they were way worse. So it's like, okay, how do I make this kind of, like, fun and compelling for them to come back? If I whip their ass, they're not gonna come back, you know? So it's like, I would let them get as close as they could as I thought they could do a takedown before not getting it and then try to, like, escape or get out. So, obviously, if I let them get really close, sometimes they get it, you know, so they're. They're enjoying it. I don't know if they ever knew I was doing this, right? I have no idea. And that was kind of like the start. Cause I. I had to figure my way out of bad positions because I had to try to make it entertaining for them where they still got something out of it and they wanted to come back the next week, and I also got something out of it. Yeah. I love this because that relationship is so important with that like that, I've had a few drilling partners, training partners that were really important to my life, and I always wonder why it's difficult, why it's so difficult to find them. Yeah. Like, I. If anyone's listening to this, I'm looking for a judo person in the Austin area. Actually, getting the reps with people is hard, even in jiu jitsu, that it's just like, people want to do the fun stuff. They don't want to really put in the work, and it takes a certain kind of personality, and then you also have to make it fun for the other person. Just like you said, if there's a skill mismatch, but also if you have an interest mismatch in terms of the. The amount of drilling you want to do, all that kind of stuff, you have to figure out ways to make it fun. Yeah, it's tricky. So you did. So I. Yeah, I think I did that, and no one told me. That's why I get some. I get frustrated because now we have, you know, just in my academy, we probably have 50, 60 high school kids only that are year round, that they're year round. You know, maybe they're not as consistent in the summer or whatever, but they're there. So when they don't have a great partner, they start whining. It's like you little bitches. Like, you know, I. Some days I get really mad about it because it's like I had no partners. I had to find freaking. Two partners come twice a week, you guys, there's still 22 people in the room. I'm sorry. There's not the perfect partner for you, but, like, go work out with that dude. Yeah. You know? Yeah. So what was the switch that changed? Or was this gradual or gradual? Okay, yeah. So let's do. So. 9th grade, I quit football. Cause I wanna get really serious. What position? Footplate. I was actually nose tackle. And I was. But at that point, so, okay, so I was also. The other thing I kind of left over is I was really fat growing up in 6th grade. I also decided, okay, I'm really fat. And if I want to be competitive wrestling, I shouldn't be fat because weight matters. I went from 130 pounds to 100 pounds in 6th grade. So by the time I was a freshman, I was 119. So I had. I still wasn't as heavy as I was on 6th grade, so I was pretty small, too. But I was also slow, unfortunately. So they put me in nose tackle. I like the compatibleness, so I was decent at it. So that's where you wrestle 119 my freshman year. Yeah. So, yeah, so then I still. I started having a lot of success state wise, but not nationally. It's my national success. Didn't come to, like, my junior year in high school, but, yeah, I was, like, grinding and getting better the whole time. And then senior year, I started having a lot of success nationally, and I got recruited. And then. But then even when my freshman year of college, I. This is where I love competing. I would go every weekend because I knew if you take the emotions out of competition, all it is is seeing your failures, acknowledging them, and then figuring out what you need to work on. Right. If we take all the emotion out of it, that's what it is. So I wrestled 50 matches as a red shirt freshman, which is incredibly rare. I had ten losses. So it's not like. And like to not. Not so great guys, you know? So, like, my skill level still at that point was not that great. And then the next year, I came out and I made the NCAA finals. So my, my. I made a gigantic jump in that red shirt year to the. To the real freshman year. So, a few questions. Yeah. Where did the funk style wrestling, the creative stuff get developed? At which stage? So I. So I think, like, looking retroactively. There was no. There was no intention to start when I was in high school with those kids. But I think that's kind of, like, what was happening, right? So what I would really say is I had one influential coach, my retro year of college named Mike Ironman. Great guy. But then the second thing was, it was just out of necessity. I had this burning desire to be the best. And when I was getting my ass kicked every day in the room. Cause we had, you know, Tyrone was there. We had all american 157. We had all american 184. So I wasn't having a ton of success. And very quickly I realized from, like, a more traditional athletic perspective, strength and speed, I couldn't keep up with anyone. I was way worse. So it's like, okay, fuck, how do I. How do I do this? You know, I want to do this. How do I do this? There's got to be a way, you know? So Mike Ireman showed me a couple things, but then it was just like, this creative expansion for the next, say, three to five years. And then even now, it's like, I don't know, there's something. And maybe you feel this way about judo or there's something that's, like, fun about the way the body moves and works and exploring something new and thinking about, hey, wrestling's been happening at a relatively high level for, we'll say, 80 to 90 years in America, and there's still new things being developed. And so when you see something new, you're like, damn. Like, that's great. Or, like, Jason know if may have to win Dixie. I'm like, how did I not think of that shit? Like, why did I think of that so easy? I should. I should have thought of that. You know? So there's this, like, obsession with the sport of wrestling and, you know, positions where I actually think sometimes think I wouldn't have smartphones because I may have been distracted by my smartphone. Maybe I wouldn't have been. Cause I was so obsessed, but maybe. But, you know, some days I had couldn't finish the single leg on this specific person. Or maybe they were finishing on me and they go home and I just fucking obsess about that one position. Like, okay, what am I missing here? And not just accepting like that. Whatever the coach says is the answer, but, like, what am I missing? What ways can my body move that no one's told me it can move yet? Where can my arms go, right? Where can I do all these things? And so I would just obsess about these things. And then, you know, sometimes you come in the next day and you say, oh, well, maybe this, you know, and maybe it works. Maybe it doesn't. Maybe it works twice, and then it doesn't work the next time. And so you kind of, like, have this creative process, and it's like, you know, there's a lot of things that are on the cutting room floor that never made it to the light because you thought they'd be good and they failed and they sucked. And then, you know, to the point where, like, my senior year, I got to this point where the people then they were just figures. Figures would wrestle in my head about positions I was thinking about. I wouldn't tell them what to do. They would just, they go in my head and then like some. Oh, fuck, wait, that's it. That, that's it. That just happened. That's the move. And then I go try to practice. And sure enough, boom. That's the move. That's exactly where you have alpha zero playing, learning chess. You have. Oh, no, it's called self plays. You have. What did the figures have? Like, no faces? They were just like, did they have. A human form or is it just like stick figures, essentially? There was not like. Yeah, it was like humans. It was more like stick figures. Wouldn't stick figures exactly like they were. That's some volume. Yeah, it was like, it was like a great person. And they had, you know, three dimensions, essentially, because I had to see how the things moved and. Yeah. I mean, this is exactly what OpenAI and DeepMind at Google are. I don't know if you've seen, but there's something called reinforcement learning in artificial intelligence where you have, like, they've done it for, like, sumo wrestling. You have. You have, like, you have these two stick figures that don't even know how to get up at first, and they figure out how to stand their 2ft, and then they figure out how to push the other person off of the pedestal. Wait, so. But what about, like, when you look at the Boston dynamics, sometimes they have trouble with, like, jumping and balancing into other stuff. So are they, are they doing that same program or. No, no, no. This. Everything Boston dynamics is doing is hard coded, so it's not, it's not learning the. All the sophisticated movements and strategies, like, high level strategies and movement, that's all something that Boston dynamics does not do. And if it does, it, like, the parkour stuff, that's all hard coded in. Oh. People, like, project and think, like, these robots have, like, discovered, like, how to move in sophisticated ways. They haven't. Well, that's what, when you and John were talking about the grappling robot. Yeah. I mean, the one thing I was obsessing about in my head is that with the chest, right. If a chest piece moves, right, the horse can move like an l. It can only move like an l. It doesn't matter if it moves at 2 meters/second or 7 meters/second it can only move there, right? Whereas, like a single leg, I can shoot a single leg with many different velocities. I can shoot at different angles. I can shoot with different amounts of force, right. I can shoot with my head up versus my head. I mean, right? All these things are going to matter. If we're talking about a human being defending the single leg, all of those things are going to matter. And that's where human beings who wrestle are calculating those things subconsciously. They're obviously not consciously calculating in their head. Oh, the force is coming at me at this. So I need to do that doing it. But see, the thing is. So you would. Absolutely. If you're doing a robot that you're wrestling, you're going to have to constrain the speed at which it moves and the power that it's able to deliver, so that presumably there'll be the limitations. So then it'll be just the same exact way as a human. But then, but even so, if we go human, max force. Jordan Burrows, double max force, right? That's the highest, that's highest we get. And then we go down from there. Even within that, it's like sometimes I can shoot a single egg with a maximum force of, we'll say 20. This is a number, right? I don't always shoot it at 20 because I feel. Sometimes I shoot at 15, sometimes I shoot at twelve. Right. Cause you feel something in your opponent that makes you do it differently. So they would have to learn how and then all these different things. And sometimes maybe I clamp a little harder. So the robot would have to learn all these different incoming inputs to the system and then create this reaction. Oh, no, no, 100%. So this would be all continuous, like. So unlike chess, it would not. It's just, chess is discrete. There's, it's one. And you move, it's a very specific set of moves. Now, here you would. Those are all variables you control, and they're continuous variables. So the speed, the force, there's actuators. So there's all these joints, right? Yeah, you can move. I mean, it's just an optimization problem. It's kind of fat. It was fascinating. So I've been fascinated thinking about it since you guys talked about it. It was a long time ago. I listened to it probably three to four weeks ago, and I've kind of been, like, obsessing about it ever since. Yeah, it just changes when. So unlike boxing, for example, or striking, you know, once you grab ahold of somebody, it changed. You're now, one body. Right. So it's very complicated. It's not just shooting a double leg without, like, maybe doing, like. Like faking a double leg and then shooting the double leg. That's very doable with robotics, but then, like, doing a clinch and from there, doing, like, a russian tie like that. Yeah, that's. I think that's way harder than people realize in terms of how many things are involved, like the force of the grip, the leverage you're providing with all the different parts of the shoulder and the arm and the torso, the twist. How much of your weight are you allocating? Like, leaning on the other person, like, taking weight off of one of your legs and the other leg, all of that. I think that's the really interesting thing about humans, is we're able to do all of this calculation subconsciously. Yeah. Subconsciously. Yeah. And that's what I've been thinking about since we. It's like how many things, even these high school athletes who are, like, getting medium good are subconsciously thinking about all the time, or not even. Not even thinking about. Sorry. Reacting to. But then even, like, for me, I'm, you know, I'm a few orders of meg do better than some of these kids I play. And so when I. When I go, like, super hard, it's like I can feel their weight moving the wrong direction. And so for me to off balance them or trip them or whatever is kind of easy sometimes, you know, because they're not feeling it the right way. Right. Or their timing's just a little bit off or the way they're grabbing the hip, maybe they should be up a little higher. Right. These really small things. Yeah. I think that's all easy to take advantage of for a robot. It's just there's so many things. The. The big problem is ethically. I don't know how many people are willing to train with a robot because you're gonna get hurt. Well, couldn't you make a robot train with a robot or no. Yes, but then it's expensive, so. Because they're gonna put the padding on that thing. I know, but then it's not. You know, it then you're not capturing the full. Why can't you put, like, some rubber coating on them? You know, something to that effect? You could. I mean, you could. Yeah, you could. I mean, you're talking about robots that are. These are humanoid robots, so we're talking about 500,000 million dollar robots. So you would have to be motivated. Spend a lot of money. To spend a lot of money. Because you have to have them wrestle for, like, a lot to get better, yet to get better. And then the open question is, how long does it take to get good enough to be a human? I don't think we understand. I don't think you understand how hard wrestling is. Yeah, like, is it a really hard problem? Like, what's harder, chess or wrestling? Wrestling, by far. Name. Close. That's. Yeah, that's the sense. So there's an infinite amount of moves, right. And possibilities. So once I shoot the single leg, now you have x amount of choices. Once you make your choice. Now I have a choice. X amount of choices. Now I. Now you have x amount of choices on the defense. And we can just keep going back and forth. Right. And this number becomes. Yeah, but the same happens with chess. Correct. But then in wrestling, you have to make these movements very instantaneously. Right. Cause if I should sing, like, I'm not gonna wait and say, what's your defense? Yeah. Right. You have to be instantaneously. And then also, again, based on the force and the vectors and the angles, you have to calculate that and adjust. So really, you know, if you're saying, why can't you. A single leg, it's not like moving the chest. It's not one move. Right. It's. If you wanna talk about different forces and stuff, it could be hundreds or thousands of different moves based on how hard I shoot it, the angle, the direction, all of those things. Yeah, but wait a minute. So robots can do this kind of stuff really fast? People probably know the physiology of this, but it's the. The reaction speed for a human is maybe 100 milliseconds, something like that. I don't know, from sensation to, like, from the signal traveling up your brain and down. I don't know what that number is. But a robots certainly could do way faster. It. You would actually have to, like, constraint the speed. Well, so the robots are already killing the chess people. Yes. So, yeah, theoretically, they could eventually be wrestlers. But you asked what was hard, wrestling or chess? Yeah. I think wrestling is because of the time component in it and then the end and the physicality of, you know, is it this force or that force? You know, because if I'm gonna say. Say we're in a seatbelt side by side. Right. A wrestling seatbelt, not based on the pressure you're giving me. I might do a bunch of things, right. And so, like, to an untrained eye, they might both look like the same thing from you to a trained feel, it's like, well, in one case, it's really evident I should go this way. In other cases, real evident, I should go that way. So the other thing to consider, just like with chess, the AI systems, so human versus human play a certain way together. They actually haven't considered a really large number of strategies that AI systems discover. So one possibility, with a robot, they'll discover certain ties and certain takedowns. I'm saying that, like, will dominate no matter what the human does. You think that? So you think there's that. So this, I mean, this, I talk about the wrestling. So fun is there's even after 80, 90 years, there's this continuous evolution. Yeah. So you'll be some, like, low single type thing, like John Smith type of situation. Well, like a down block, go behind is something that has really, I would say really in the last five ish years has really been evolved. What's the go behind, down block, go behind. So when you head inside or head outside matters, but there's one for both, you shoot at me, essentially, I take my leg. Boom. And then, so that was kind of in existence when I was in college. Right. You down block them and you stop. But usually you hit on this side of their head. Right. And now immediately as you shoot, I attack that shoulder, and then I start hitting a go behind on you. Right. And so, like that, in its current incarnation, it absolutely wasn't wrong. When I was in college, I would say it probably became popular five to seven years ago. So, yeah, there's these big things that are happening now. I really want to robot because I want to be ahead of the game. I want to know what I'm missing. I mean, one interesting thing you have with Alphazero that plays chess is it sacrifices pieces much more than humans do. So give you a piece, and not only does it give you a piece, it will wait a bunch of moves before it makes you pay because it. Knows that that's better for the long term. Long term. So, like, humans rarely sacrifice without getting the piece back. Like two or three moves after Alphazero can wait, like five moves. So. So basically you'll have potentially with wrestling, you might have a robot that, like, puts itself in bad positions, but in a certain kind of way that will. Actually lures the opponent in to trap. Exactly. That's what my style is based on. Well, you basically narrow, one thing to do is you narrow the set of choices. You put yourself in a bad position, but it narrows a set of choices. For them because they're not used to it. Yeah, they're not used to it, and. And then you. You drag them into, uh, into your. Yeah, so. But there's also. The problem is there's mechanical issues. Like, it's actually just difficult to build robots that are able to sense because we have sensation throughout our body. Yeah. It's just difficult to build that kind of robot. It's expensive. You start talking about multi, multi million dollars, and then people start asking questions, why did you invest all of this money? I want to see what moves I do. Hello. It could be better investment. Okay. So I mentioned John Smith. He is, if people don't know, one of the great wrestlers, wrestling coaches ever. He's also creative, like you. He spoke really highly of you. What do you think about that guy? Did you guys ever work together? Not really. So you know what? When I was a senior and I had the people wrestling in my head, I was lucky enough to be doing, I was pretty much graduated. So I did an independent study with the sports psychology. I was potentially going to grad school for sports psych. Well, I actually did nine credits, and then I decided I don't want to do it anymore. I continue learning on my own. But I had an independent study with the guy who's the head of USA track and field support psych. So I guess. So here was the class was, I got to go sit down and talk with him for an hour. And he was, like, fascinated by me. So he didn't really make me do homework. It was like the greatest three credits ever. We just talked. I learned so much. It was so awesome. So one time it came up, I had these robot people wrestling in my head. And he said, well, who else do you think? I bet John Smith happened. So I went and got John Smith's number. I called him and said, hey, you ever had these people wrestling in your head? And he said, yeah, but as soon as I stopped coaching, they went away. Same thing happened to me. Soon they started coaching, they went away. So if I really force myself now, and I'm like, I see some in practice, and it's really higher level because high school wrestling, I don't want to, maybe I feel bad, but it's a little bit lower level. So if, like Keegan, for example, who won the journey, if he's struggling with a problem or ask me a question and I can force myself to see the bodies moving and think about it again, kind of like I was in the early age, but it won't just flow there anymore. So he said it went away. And for me, it went away also. By the way, if you can pause on the. On the bodies in your head? Yeah. What, like, how are they generating new ideas? Are they just kind of. I don't know. You tell me. So it's just. They're just, like, rambling in your head? It would be specifically based on a problem I was struggling with or a specific position. You know, kind of. It goes in for single. And then. And then go from there. Yeah. So, like, I'm sitting in geography class and, you know, have to work that hard because it's easy. Right. And, yeah, I'm just sitting there, like, kind of acting like I'm looking at the board and these guys are wrestling, and I'm watching them wrestle. And, yeah, sometimes they come up with a really good solution. Is there somebody you looked up to style wise? Gable. John Smith. Yeah. All these, like, legend status people. Probably gable or gable. John Smith after the fact. So the problem with wrestling in my era was you couldn't watch it. There was no. There's no access. Right. It wasn't. It wasn't really available. Even if you want to say, go find a bunch of John Smith, Matt. They're kind of hard to find. Right. There's a couple of them on YouTube, but I've obviously seen all of those. But in. In my era, there was. There really wasn't any of it. So it was hard to be a fan of something. And that's what wrestling. Wrestling has his. The fans are going like this because now, you know, you flip on the flow app and you can watch, you know, something that's happening in Europe. Right. We can do this easily so we can be a fan of people. So now I'm more a fan of wrestling than I was then because there just was no access. So now I can watch someone I like and say, oh, shit, like, that guy's wrestling. Oh, boom. I flipped my phone on. I watched them wrestle, you know, that. Type of thing, you know, on a quick rant. It's really frustrating that you can't watch the Olympics. Oh, my God, it's so frustrating. I've been. I think I'm gonna go to war on. Go to NBC's headquarters. I'll go with you. You got a soldier here. I was talking to Jimmy. Jimmy Pedro. He was surprised by this, too. Most matches, you can't see, even you talk about, like, comeback, gable, Steelson. You can't see the full match. You get, like, a crappy highlight. So the two. The two biggest things in rat and really the three, the NCAA championships on ESPN, the Olympic trials are on NBC, and the Olympics are NBC. And these things. These companies are so big, they don't have a department dedicated to selling the rights to that footage. Right. So the rights to wrestling footage, which no one really cares all that much about except a niche, are the exact same as track and field or basketball and Olympics. So, yes, all of this stuff is completely inaccessible to us. The NCAA, the Olympic trials. In the Olympics. You can't go watch old film on it. It sucks. Yeah, older current film. Yeah. So you came and watch the gable match? The gable seals. No, they did a. You know, they do something that annoys the fuck out of me. What? Okay. They. They. They do, like a three or two minute highlight. So it's like they capture the most important thing, but, like, it's all about the buildup. Yeah, yeah. It's like that very beginning when you step on the mat and the nerves and you walk out and like that. I mean, I don't know, you miss. Then. Then when the triumph happens or the heartbreak happens, it has that much more power. Yeah. If you want to go to war with NBC or ESPN, I'm happy to join that. IOC. Well, I mean, does the IOC. IOC is selling for the Olympics, is the one that's making. Well, so NBC broadcast. So they obviously have the live rights. You would think they would have recorded if they. I mean, they're the ones recording it. You would think they keep the rights when you think. No, no, I. Their lice getting a license of it. They're getting exclusive, like, license. But, like the. You know, for example, I've had this. I talked to Travis Stevens, the judo player, and there's a really sort of famous match. It's a heartbreak in his career from 2012 Olympics where he goes against the german Ole Bischoff, whatever. It's a 20 minutes match to go to war, and that's not available anywhere. But it's uploaded on YouTube and set to private. The reason I know this is on the IOC channel. So they've uploaded all of these matches. They haven't been put up. So actually. So my Olympic match, the one I won, got put public, and I don't know if it was private. It got put up on YouTube. I was alerted to it the week of my Jake Paul fight. It was so dumb. I'm like, why the. This is epic. 13 years later, this is bullshit. Like, this should have been up. So, I mean. Okay, so what about Olympic trials footage? That has to be the USOC, then, or NBC. So I know, like, okay, so I know flow, right? Cause I work for them. I know, if flow buys your event or whatever. Right? They buy the rights generally in the contract, they'll have rights to both live stream it and then use that footage at any point moving forward. Those matches live on Flo's website. That's why I would be surprised if NBC didn't have something similar. Flow does a pretty good job of providing, like, a place where you can watch all these matches. NBC does not. Does not. Yeah, and also, there's an argument with flow as well, but certainly with olympics, there's a difference between what flow does and what the Olympics represent. What do you mean by that? Like, it feels like the Olympics, which is what the charter says should be as accessible as possible. Yes, like. Like you should really lower the barrier for entry for the olympics. You know, that's what the charter says. But those people in the IOC, those are the worst people ever. Yeah, they're very bad. Well, they're not. They're not bad. They just lost touch of the dream they once had when they joined the IOC. Well, I would argue. I would argue all the way back that these are rich, fat cats who, like, I get so mad about the NCAA, which finally now got rid of this bullshit term amateurism. It's like where there's some holy grail where you can't make money to be an amateur athlete, but the people who own the IOC are the people who own the institutions, college institutions are making boatloads of money off of you. That's crap. So you competed, like you said, at the 2008 Olympics. Did you believe you can win gold? Yeah, absolutely. So your mental game was on point? Yeah, I was ready. So what. What went wrong? This wasn't good enough? That was what I said. Yeah, yeah. I mean, so at that point in time, I. It was my first year of international competition. So when I came out in 2007 is my first time making 74 kg, which is pretty small for me. I had some failures, but then quickly I turned that around and I was having success in America. I was beating everyone. I don't say easy, but I. Yeah, you know, I was doing really well. I went international one time and there was one match I got cheated on. The Russians. They're cheaters. Excuse Ukraine, not Russia. I lost. R1 match where I actually lost, and it was to Dennis sarguch, who would go on to win three world titles. But he was behind the t of that year and it was competitive, so I knew, ok, I'm going with the best guys in the world. I beat a bunch of other guys who, you know, were. Were good had had past decent results, so I knew I was, like, right there. Unfortunately, I ran this guy, ivan Fundora, and I had someone do scouting reports for him, actually, my high school coaches for our academy, John messenbrank. And Fundor was the worst stylistic matchup. I got him and I lost him second round. So I wasn't good enough. Had I decided to keep wrestling, I probably would have gotten better. But at that point in time, this wasn't in the cards. So in your division was like you said, satyaev, satyaev. That guy is special. He's very special. So that would be my other guy that you asked earlier who I enjoyed watching, and that was a guy. It was kind of after the fact because it was hard to access footage. But he was a lot of fun to watch. What do you think made him great? A lot of people talk about him as potentially one of the greatest ever. Absolutely. I mean, six. And so he won six and three. Six worlds, nine. Six worlds, three olympics, nine total, which, there's only one or two people above that. So again, it was, it was hard to watch any live footage of him, but from what I've seen, his feel is different. He was just ahead of his time and the feel and the touch he had for certain moves and different things because obviously, physically, he's kind of unimposing. He's taller and skinnier, which is, it can work in wrestling, but is by less represented. Yeah, he was special. So. Good. Do you take any inspiration from, let's talk about Dagestan in general. What do you think makes those wrestlers great? Yeah, it's fascinating. Have you read the book the talent code? Yeah, it's great. And that kind of talks about these talent hotspots all around the world. And so now, obviously, with our wrestling academies, we try to take a, some lessons from that and apply it. I got to assume they didn't cover Dagestan in that book specifically, but I got to assume a lot of the same principles that are in that book apply to Dagestan and wrestling. They did South Korea and women's golf. They did Curacao and baseball. They picked a lot of these other places that were really elite. I think it was maybe Moscow and women's tennis also. I think all these things that make any group great organization is probably the. Same things that's happening there with the hardship. I mean, what, is there something specific about wrestling that can create so many great champions from that area? So obviously, they're all, they all love it. Like, it's a big deal that wrestling is specifically is a big deal there. You know, they do sambo also, obviously. So that's part of it is a lot of the kids are doing it. They obviously are rough tumble, tough life. Getting a lot of fights. And then I think that also that a lot of them. It is a way out, right? The elite level athletes in that part of the world, from my understanding, are really well compensated compared to what the average person makes, and they're treated really well. So people see it as a way out, whereas, like. And then, honestly, if America's getting better. But in 2008, the reason I went to MMA was because I didn't want to be poor my whole life. You know what I'm saying? It sucks. It's like, well, I don't want to make $20,000 for the next 48 years, so I'm gonna go do something else. If I could have made even, and I need to be rich, right? If I could have made $100,000 or $70,000 wrestling, I probably would've kept wrestling. So I think. I think it's this factors, and obviously, now they have a really, like, a bunch of really good people in one area, so there's probably. And it's been going on for a long time, so it's probably a bunch of, like, adults and coaches that are coming back and helping that progress. So, yeah, a lot of those things that happen. So I'm definitely going to travel there as I talk to him, because I can speak Russian. It makes. It makes it very. Makes me uniquely qualified to. My brother can speak a little bit of Russian. Your brother can? Yeah. Okay. Like, a little bit. Like two squares and. No, no. Like, he would. Oh, man. Don't make me overstep. I think he would be able to have a conversation with you, I think. Okay, probably not like you. What's the. What's the reason he knows Russia. I don't know why he got obsessed with languages. And so his college degree is actually, what do they call interdisc, where you have three minors. So he had a minor in Russian, a minor in Spanish, and maybe Japanese. I'm messing up. It's definitely Russian. And Spanish are for sure. I don't know what the third one is. No, but, yeah, Dagestan. It's really fascinating. But the emphasis on technique, the lighter drilling, like, they don't really go super hard. Yeah. And I only spent a couple, so I was there. I was in Vladi Kavkaz in 2008. That was where the world cup was. We had to train there. For, like, two days afterwards. So I didn't get to dig deep, did dig deep into what was going on or anything, but, yeah, I mean, I think sparring has. Sparring is very beneficial for wrestling. Not like sparring. Mma is. We fight. Right. Sparring in wrestling is. So I always just describe it to be really simple. If we're drilling, it's relatively 0% resistance. If we're going as hard as we can, that's 100%. There's all this gray area in the middle that's sparring. Right. And so, you know, if you have a good relationship, like, you know, college, me and my brother, we could just go and we know where each other's at. We don't have to talk about it. Right. But, like, in my wrestling club, we'll say, okay, hey, I want you guys to go 50% in this position, or I want the high crotch guy. I want him to shoot, and this is for him. So I want him to go 70. And defensive guy, I want you to go 40. So you're not, you're not supposed to be trying to win here. You're going to go a little later. I want you to give him some looks, you know? So I think. I think he has really taken hold in America. I think it's really beneficial for success, and I think that's. I mean, America's doing better than we've ever done historically. Well, that's 70 and 40. That's like an art form to find that right place, because, like, what the really good people I've trained with, they go much closer to 100% speed wise, or, like. But without, like, forcing things. Yeah, you would. When you're going, it's some weird combination of things that, like, if you truly earn a technique, then you're given that technique. Yeah, but, like, if you don't, you don't. Yeah. And then it becomes much less injury prone. It becomes somehow more fun, more dynamic. You don't get stuck in positions. It's just a lot of movement. Yeah. The one thing so you and John talked about, you know, like, different ways to learn and get better. And so I think Jon obviously innovated within the sport of jiu jitsu, and so for us, one of the, and maybe there's a differentiator for us, I think about it. Sorry to interrupt. You have this academy, and you sent me this plan that you have a really well thought through plan for how to develop a good wrestler. So, but, so I think it's, for me, there's four categories. Right. There's the teaching, which is like, you don't know shit. You're coming in and I'm showing you the move, and you're literally going out there and you're trying to. Me, that's not even drilling. That's like teaching. Like, you're trying to learn something. So obviously, in someone's earlier periods, they're spending a lot of time in that phase because they literally don't even know how to move their bodies the right way. Once you learn the skill, then there's the drilling, because you need to. You absolutely have to get those reps to become really proficient in that movement. And then the sparring, and then the live. Right? And so, like, I think obviously, by the time you get to the kind of endpoint. Right. But further on, the time you spend teaching is so. I don't want to say I'm sorry, in the learning teaching phase is not insignificant, but so much smaller, because to someone who's really good, who I've coached for ten years, I don't have to give this big, long, drawn out explanation. I just have to say, hey, move your hand a little differently, or just do this. We don't have to spend any time there. So I think that's something that consumes for the younger kids, say, five through twelve or 13. We're consuming a massive amount of time there on that teaching learning phase. And then as we get older, that time wanes a lot. But that makes total sense, right? Yeah. It's funny. Cause when you look at, like, jiu jitsu schools, they spend a lot of time in the teaching learning, and then the live feels like there's not enough drilling. I like how you draw a distinction there. Yeah. Because it feels like you're always starting from scratch. Like, people have, like, very crappy short term memory. Like, they're not. Like, the way teaching is done is you show a technique from scratch, and it seems disjoint. It is, for sure. Especially if you have a class that's been with you for a while. You don't have to start from scratch. You can say, hey, let's focus on this one little thing here, or after we do this, let's do that. And you kind of start putting it all together. And then with Jiu Jitsu, the thing that I really struggled with was a couple things. And this is not speaking for all the Jiu jitsu, my personal experience through the sport. And I actually found, when I unretired, I found someone really great that I loved. And I really wish it was Mark Lehman. I don't know if you know him at all. I wish I would have found him earlier. Cause he was just tremendous. But number one, there's no drilling. So it's like in wrestling, I can boil down to. I can probably name you the best six moves, right? So we need, as younger people, single leg, right? Single legs. Gonna be the most proficient takedown. It always has been. I don't know. Probably always will be. Unless they figures out something different. The robot. The robot. We're gonna shoot a lot of single legs. Why? Because we're. Cause everyone's gonna do that, right? We're gonna shoot a lot of single legs. So just like, say, an arm bar or some type of sweep, right? Why can't we go get 50 reps there? Hey, we. I mean, by the time I've been in your jiu jitsu school for two years, I better know. Fucking armbar. I better know what. So don't. Don't spend ten minutes teaching me. Just tell me to go hit 50 reps. And then if one. I'm hitting my reps. If there's something I'm doing wrong, then just say, hey, Ben, move your leg a little bit that way or raise your hips up a little more. Right? Like, correct as you're drilling. So you're getting all these reps at it, so you're becoming more proficient. And then the other thing I really struggle with was, to your point, during live, so many times, it's just this five minute go. Go. And that's not the most efficient way to learn, because when you have two people, especially when they're focused on winning, and you say go, they're going to go to whatever they do best. Well, if I'm trying to make you good at something, I don't want you doing what you do best all the time. I need you doing some other things. Right. If you have a great single leg, but you can't shoot to the other side of their body, well, we need to work on that, right? You need to start shooting the other side. There's some sense, though, you. It's not like you should be told what to work on, but you should be told to work on the thing that you want to work on. Meaning. Because I don't know about. Maybe you can comment on this, but, you know, everybody develops a different game as you get better and better. There's a set of things you need to be working on. So I actually have, like, when I. Especially when I'm, like, training very seriously, I'll have a specific technique that I have in mind. And I have a sheet of paper on the side where I literally, my head, keep count off how many times I put myself in that position and pulled off the technique. And that's all I care about. Yeah. In, like, training. So I'll just. Whatever it is, if it's a guillotine, it's a guillotine. Arm drag. Arm drag. But I want to make sure I don't. I love numbers, so I'll say, like, I'll make sure I get 50 arm drags. Yeah. I'm not getting off the mat until I do. And that, you know, if it takes. Drilling or live contest. So, in this, the thing I'm describing right now is the life contest, but drilling, obviously drilling. So I feel like I can't find a drilling part. Like, it's so hard to find drilling partners. Even so boring. It's. It's annoying to me that this is boring. And there's nothing more annoying to me than the look of boredom on another person's face when we're drilling a. Yeah. It's like, do you really think drilling is that beneficial to you? Because you said it's a job. Yes. Yes. He thinks I'm an idiot, but. Yes. Why? Why am I. Am I an idiot or why it's extremely beneficial? Let's go. Let's see what your explanation is. Why is it so beneficial? I think, for me, there's a meditative aspect to it, where the more you drill, the more you start noticing the details. Let me. Minute details. I'm not gonna push back all the way, because. So every time if I was wrestling, I'll warm up high, crouching, like, whatever, right? But even so, say, like, at a high level, when I'm really wrestling ten years ago, even during that drill portion, if we talk about the resistance of our opponent from zero to 100, it's very likely that my partner at that point, because people I'm really comfortable with, they're probably at least going 20 or 30. Right. They're probably giving me a certain look with the sprawl or, you know, I gotta get through their hands. If I. If I don't set it up right, they might put their arm down. Right. So it's like, we are drilling. Cause we're wrestling at a really low resistance level, but there's a little bit of sparring. The 20%. The 20. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So that's not all. That's not really drilling. Cause I think of drilling, I think, literally, you're shooting, and I'm just, boom, your dummy. Boom, boom, boom. Boom type of thing. No, it's very hard to be a dummy that doesn't do 20%. So you're gonna do 20%? Yeah, that's so. Yes, but that's, like, sparring a little bit, then. No, but they're not really resisting. They're just giving you the right frame. They're. They're giving you the right, like, movement, and they're being. They're being an intelligent dummy. Yeah, surely. I mean, but also, like, the really important component of this is you pick the techniques for which it's beneficial. If the technique is. Has dynamic elements to it, you don't want to be doing that with. I'm saying, like, there's certain moves, and I like those moves, and I select the game base in those moves that, like. So, are you drilling to get better? Are you drilling just to work out? No, to get better. That's what I'm trying to tell you. I believe you can become, like, exceptionally good very fast by drilling. But how? First of all, let me. Let me ask you an empirical question. Let me have. Have you actually drilled 10,000 times a particular move? Millions, million? Hundreds of thousands, likely. I think you're just saying numbers. I don't think. You know what? Astronomical. It's way more. 10,000. I don't think there was a ten. Year period where I wrestled every single day. That's. That's 3000 days. So you're telling me 10,000, that's only three of them a day. I did way more than that. Three of them. Probably 30 of them a day. That's. That's a hundred thousand. Yeah, yeah. Hundreds of thousands. I doubt you get 30 a day. For I did for. I am for sure 100%. There's no doubt. All right. Because some days I might do 100. Right? So 30. 30 is not very many, especially if we count all reps, if we're counting drilling and live. So, like, our coach, college coach, would make us just drill a lot, and I always hated it, so I would. I would rebel and just kind of give a little spar, you know, you shoot a high crotch. We'll start you. Coach wants to drill high crouch. Okay, we'll start. You shoot the high crotch. That's great. Then I'm gonna sit the corner. I'm gonna give you my hip, or I'm gonna. You know, I'm gonna try something. So then you have to react. And I would argue that all skill level past, like the beginner stuff, is some necessity of that. Right. I'm going to do this, then. What are you going to do? It's back and forth. I shoot single leg. What are you going to do? I shoot high crouch. What are you going to do? And you have to start unconsciously programming these things in your head, because if you're consciously thinking about it, it's going to be too slow to actually hit it a map. But the drilling is the unconscious programming. But the simple movement, the first simple movement. The first simple movement, that single leg or the high crotch or arm drag, whatever. Like, I feel like the amount you're gonna get better at it is so minuscule compared to the amount you're gonna gain at doing other things around it. You see? No, but that's the key word. You feel. Okay, that's your opinion. If we did. If we did a study on it, that I would be proven correct? No. Perhaps so. First of all, your brain, as an exceptionally creative combat athlete, it's clear that you don't like the boredom of drilling. Like, it's obvious that you. That you have, like, you're such a creative energy that you're just not going to be somebody who's going to enjoy that. So enjoyment is probably having an active mind is really important. So the question is, do you have the kind of makeup that has an active mind during a drilling on a dummy? And I have that mind like I. Can you really think? Okay, so if you're. Let's pick a technique. What technique do you want to drill? A lot I would do in jiu jitsu or wrestling, whatever you want. It's hard to describe with words, but certain guard passes. Let me. Let me think. Just guard pass. Okay, so you have a guard pass and you get it to be as a nine and a half out of ten. Right. Just from a technical standpoint, don't you think you need some resistance to feel? Because essentially all, all benefit after that is going to be, what are they going to try to do to me? And if they ship their that way, do I need to single here, move there? So it's like I. So I. I actually think we're agreeing, but maybe terminology wise. Well, the split is the important thing. Like how much of each? So I think it is sparring. Like, I think it's a very light touch. Spar is what you're talking about, which is, in my opinion, really isn't drilling. And it's because drilling past the basic proficiency, I don't think brings much value. But that's what I'm trying to tell you, is I think it does. I think. I think if doing that same movement. I think you begin to learn more over time. Like you're saying, like, once you get the basic proficiency, then there's diminishing returns. I don't think so. Yeah, that's our thing. I don't think so. I think everything has diminishing returns when you're learning a technique, but with something. As complex as wrestling or grappling. If you can have way more gains over here, why focus on going from a 9.7 to a 9.8 if this other area, if you're spending so much time here that there's other areas left unexplored and you can make gigantic gains over there? No, but you're going to lose. I think a lot depends on your style. I think a lot is determined by how good you are at one thing. And so if you want to become a master of a particular thing and then make your whole game where it's all pulled into that system, then, I don't know. I think one is too small of a number. Yeah, small. I feel like you can't be easily this. Like, I. Yeah, you want. You want to funnel. You want to create funnels? Funnels. Funnels. Right. Where everything goes into a few positions, and then it's ideally 100%. Yeah, yeah. But, like, I feel you can get, like, drilling on a dummy 80% of the time and 20% of the time live rolling with people worse than you? Like, a little bit worse than you or a lot worse than you. Yeah. So I think so. I think. I definitely think so. My. My buildup would be teach. So we're talking complex technique, right? So by the time we're talking, we'll say a light, late high school kid who's pretty proficient. He's probably done the drilling part. So then now it's like, okay, if I want to get something new to you, I'll probably tell you, you'll probably be able to do the basic premise within five to ten minutes, if they're good, right, do this. Okay. They do it. Then it's like, okay, so now, here's from here what we're gonna do. We're gonna go light sparring. So I know you have success. Cause I need you to complete the task in order to get better at it. That's something a lot of people in wrestling mess up, is they just wanna go to the toughest person. But if you go to the toughest person, you're not gonna actually execute on any skills. You're gonna get a workout, but you're not. And I need you to execute. Cause I need you to get good at this. In order to get good at it, you have to get all the way through the technique. Why do you need them to complete? Just so they gain confidence in the technique or go through. They have to feel all the way through. Like, if I said, learn a high crotch when you're drilling, but stop halfway every time, but you're not actually going to be able to do it because you're going to stop. You're not going to feel so, you know, try it on someone. Spar lightly, get it. Do it on someone who's not as good as you get it. Then kind of work your way up the ladder so you can get it on someone your own skill level or maybe better than you. Right. In a live competition. So it's like, I don't know, I feel like that basic drilling, like, um, so a kid like Keegan, who I brought up a few times, like, I feel like if there's something new, I could literally tell him, like, this is what I want you to do. And he's such a great feel. Like he could go drill it proficiently within probably a minute or two. But then to hit it on someone high level, that's going to take quite a while longer. And that's a mix of drilling and sparring on people a little bit worse than you. Yeah. And then. Yeah. Then equal and then better. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Because there's, there's, there's just with, with grappling, there's such, like a feel component to the pressure, the movement and all these things. And there's still. I said there's so many things you can throw at someone out of one position. Not just moves, but moves at different levels of force or whatever. Are you and these kids developing, like, a big picture strategy of, like, what are the main setups and takedowns and just like a whole system? Um, so we, you know, as kind of sent your technique book. Right. And how we kind of go at approach it. So I think in wrestling, you're going to need. You're going to need a handful of things. Just off the. Off the word go. Right. You're going to. So I think on our feet, I need to build tech this side of the body. I need to build tech that side of the body. I need to be able to bring you underneath me. I need to be able to go around you. Right now, we can accomplish those different ways, but we should have all of those weapons if we want to be really good some way. Right. Um, so if I neglect one of those. So if I neglect the ability to, say, pull you down right from headlock, you. Um, now, if I have a good shot and you're smart, you're just going to lower your stance. So my shot is not going to be as successful, and I have the inability to pull you down. Right. So I kind of need all of those so I can. As they get better, I can point those things out, um, on bottom, my folks out bottom. There's certain things like, you have to be good at leg right, defense. Right. You have to. I mean, at high level, or you're just gonna. You're gonna get. When you get it in, you're just gonna get stuck there. Not gonna be able to escape. But besides that, yeah, there's a. There's a multitude of things you can choose from, and I'm gonna. Depending on your body style and what you're good and bad at, I'm gonna probably develop something a little different I might give you. Hey, you do the quad pod, you be better as a knee slide, whatever. Yeah. And top, kind of same thing. I have to ask you about Khabib. So I remember a while ago, Rogan said that that's a perfect fight for Khabib. You are. So let me ask two questions. The first, do you think you can beat him in an MMA match when you're at your peak? Yeah, I don't like. Yeah, I mean, this is one of those people where people, like, will get really mad at me if I say yes. But, yeah, I mean. But how would you do it? How would you solve that puzzle? Yeah, I mean, we would grapple, and I think I would be better than him, but I. You know, I feel weird saying, as people. Yeah, right. You're full of shit, you know, and. But that's. No. No one out grappled them, right? I mean, nobody did. And maybe I'm wrong on this, but I. If we will get the best possible candidates, I'm definitely one of them, and then obviously, I'd have a small size advantage, too. So in a wrestling match, so we can just reduce that MMA match to a wrestling match, what do you think is the right strategy on him? Like, do you understand his style, that the. His wrestling style, the pressure he applies? Do you understand how the hell he makes it happen? Yeah. I mean, he never, unfortunately, fought any real, who, I would say really, really high level wrestlers. I was actually really disappointed how bad Justin Gaethje's wrestling was, because Justin Gaethje had some solid success, but his wrestling was really bad in that fight. Gaethje had success in CWA. Yeah, I think he was 7th place, maybe, or somewhere. He was definitely all american. It was lower, though. So, yeah, I would like to see how he dealt with someone who was like, who? I think, oh, man, this guy's a really high level wrestler because, you know, we saw, and this is early in his career, but, you know, Glason Tebow did give him some issues earlier in his career, so I would like to see him in that situation and see how he does. I would love to. Like, you know, like I tell you, I just love wrestling. Grappling, like, yeah, I'd love this. Someone said, hey, Benjen, you know, Khabib wants to roll with you. Okay. I'm there tomorrow. It sounds like a blast. Let's go. It's probably competitive as hell. Yeah. You're still competitive. I know when to be and when not to be. Like, you know, say if I'm going to high school kids or not going to be competitive, because then I'm just being a dick. How would you take them down? What? Real wrestling? Wrestling. Wrestling. Wrestling, wrestling. I would probably try to text single eggs and stuff. Single eggs? Yeah. Haven't. Okay. I mean, I have. No, I've. Honestly, I don't have the slightest clue. I'd have to feel. I'd feel him out, but single leg is my best take. But people talk about his wrestling being really good. People that train with him, so. Okay. So I grilled someone, I will not say who on the Ed Ruth thing. Cause Ed Ruth is very elite at focused on wrestling. He never became that great at fighting, unfortunately. Wait, Ed Ruth wrestled Khabib? They were on the same team for a while. Yeah. Okay. And there was rumors that Khabib beat him up, and I said, I sure can't believe that. And I've heard that that was. If they were just straight wrestling, Ed would get slightly the better of it. Well, Edwards is, like, one of the greats. He's great. He's really good. Yeah. So that was what I heard. But in an MMA setting, because of all the tools that Khabib would get. Him, I don't know what. But I agree. I agree with Rogan on this one. That would have been good to see. Yeah, that would be fun. So, yeah, if Khabib wants to work out, I'd love it. I love. I love wrestling and grappling. I don't do much jujitsu, because I just don't have time for it anymore. I'm at the wrestling academy, like, every single day, but yeah. I love jujitsu. Well, I did it. And, you know, if I didn't have wrestling academies, I probably would still be doing jujitsu. Yeah. You did well in jiu jitsu as well. But let me ask you a ridiculous question. Who's the greatest of all time? Freestyle or folk style? Oh, wrestling. Wrestling. Hmm. Well, I will say my knowledge past, like the year 2000 island really not that great because you. Which direction? Sorry? After 2000? No, before because you can't find any film or anything, you know, and so you hear of all. So you need evidence, you need direct evidence. I want to be able to watch them and see them and feel the times and feel their opponents and, you know, all those things to really like. I hate giving bad answers, you know, so I would. There's just not enough footage of any of those people, you know, we took. We go back to someone like Alexander medved, like, you can't find footage. You can't find anything on it. You know, it's like, who is he wrestling? I, you know, I'm not sure. So post 2000, I think, and obviously just freestyle. So Americans has the, probably the best argument post 2000, I think said July of if he had the russian tank that guys. Yeah. So who's, who's better, Snyder or sad? July. I just wanted the Olympics. I understand this. I understand how that works. But there's pretty close, right? Not really. Not that match, but in general, the matchup, so. Well, so Kyle won the first one in 17, said July have pinned him the following year. But then Kyle lost and took bronze in 19 and then just lost. I don't want, I don't want to say fairly decisively, but it was, it was six to three and there was a late takedown. He kind of gave it up and maybe visually competitive, maybe wouldn't have. They're going to wrestle again, like two weeks here. So that, you know. Yeah, you, I mean, you have to say such a live. At this point. There's nothing else to say unless Kyle proves us otherwise. Yeah, not enough people talk about sedulive. Okay. Why you think that guy should go to MMA? You think Kyle should go to MMa? Some of these guys, yeah, they're making. Enough money in wrestling where they don't really feel the need to. It's terrifying, though, as a heavyweight sedgwife would probably. It's like, it's like khabib, but heavyweight. Well, I don't know if you remember. Do you remember Bilal Makov? So Bilal Makov actually was the russian representative in both styles of 2016, greco and freestyle. And he was, to my knowledge, the only person the UFC has ever signed. That was zero. In modern era signed, that was zero and zero. And then he actually never ended up fighting. But weird, right? So, yeah, no motivation. I don't know what the story is because sometimes out of Russia, I mean, maybe you have better sources than I do. Sometimes it feels like dudes just disappear, like they're a world champ or Olympic champ. And all of a sudden you're like, wait, where'd you go? You talk shit about Russia earlier in the conversation. So what did I say? I forgot. But I think steroids. I think somebody's gonna show up to your door. I'm worried. Honestly. I've said enough bad things where I would be kind of looking over my shoulder if I went to the. I, for one, loved the Russians. What about Icarus? How does that make you feel? What about it? It's fake news. Oh, really? I'm just kidding. Yeah, you know, it's troublesome and I hate cheating in all of its forms. Any other, like, recaps from the Olympics of 2020, Tokyo, that stood out to you? Gable, Stevenson? Like, anything like that? Yeah. No, I think America's coming to the point where we're going to compete with Russia every single year in wrestling, which obviously, you know, long, long time ago, many, many. We did. We were great. And then kind of after that Soviet Union period, I think there was a lot of poverty in that area, and that kind of led the wrestling team going down a little bit. And then obviously a lot of those regions where they found oil and gas in the Caspian Sea, I believe. And they've been really kind of on the upswing for the last 20 years. And now America really, since 2012, has been on the upswing in wrestling, and we're kind of really competing with them and they're not sending a couple of their best guys. So, Oslo. So for those who don't know, the Olympics got pooped back in the air. So they are hosting the world 2021 world championships despite the fact that we just had the Olympics two months ago. So it's happening next week in Oslo, Norway. So, like, Russia is not sending their number one at 57 and number one at 65. So it's like, America's probably going to win, I think. I don't want to guarantee anything, but there's. There's a really good chance all those guys competing, America gave any of the Olympians that meddled the opportunity to not even have to wrestle off. They just got to keep the spots. Since it was two months later if they medaled. So the only one who's not is gable. Gable is moving on. We have a pretty good guy behind him named Nick Wisdowski, who's a world medalist, but then he's a burlesque field in the 79 spot, Jaden Coxfield in the 92 spot, who's a world champion also. So we have. It's a hell of a team. Pretty good squad. Yeah, pretty good squad. So given your run in Bellator in one championship, that was like one of the most dominant runs in MMA, what would you say was, like, key to your dominance in that long undefeated streak, huh? Probably consistency would be one. The fact that I just. I lived and trained the same way no matter where my life was. Whereas a lot of fighters, once they start making money for the first time, they have all these obligations and they travel and they really enjoy making money. And that's kind of why some of them fall off. She had like, the same process, like the same camp and my house. I didn't vacation. Yeah, everything just. No, you know, and so that was a big part of it. Obviously, the style thing is like, no one could. There was only a few people who could stop my style. And I think I continued to get better as a mixed martial artist, and I wasn't as innovative in mixed martial arts, but there was a handful of things. Then I innovated. You're specifically in the top position where I spent a lot of time, where just like, there was just once I got on top of you, it was like in a spider web, and there was just kind of no way out, you know, you never felt the certain things I was doing. And so people just. They gave up eventually. How's the level of wrestling in MMA, would you say? So I saw somewhere like champions, the most popular martial art for current UFC champions are all wrestling. Wrestling. So we just lost a bunch of the belts. Wrestling. Wrestling as a sport. Right. But, yeah, one point we had, I think it was eight of nine, maybe, or something to that effect. And I think. I think it's not just wrestling, not just the actual martial art of wrestling that contributes to our success in mixed martial arts, but other things. Like this is the way we're systemized. So most kids reach high level sets, have went through the high school program and the college program, and they know how to show up on time and they know how to work hard. So when they go to ATT or aka or wherever, they know how to show up on time and they know how to work hard, and that's going to get you a really long way. Just those two things, right? Not even the techniques, it's just the discipline. Those things. Then I think you throw on top of the fact that most of us have competed 1500 to 2000 times, probably by the time we get to 20, something like, that's a huge advantage, too. Most of these other people from other disciplines maybe have competed 100, if that, right? So we have this competitive process down really, really, really well. Plus the weight cut. The weight cut. There's all these things, right. That factor into it. I think the fact that we're really open minded, like, I think if you would. I don't pick on Jiu Jitsu again, but, like, how many jiu jitsu guys have became highly proficient in wrestling versus how many wrestling guys have became highly proficient in Jiu Jitsu? I think that number swings one way and not that much the other way, you know? So we're open to adapting and learning. And for some reason, like Jiu jitsu people, how many of them have got high level wrestling or even mediocre wrestling? The number's really small. Like, they refuse to. It's really frustrating. Like, why won't they do this? This is obviously part of it. You know, I don't pick on specific guys, but there's certain guys in the history of MMA where you're like, listen, man, I mean, Damian Maia, who's my last fight, is a great example of someone who actually did get proficient wrestling, right? But there's some of these jiu jitsu guys. It's like, if you just got on top, you would submit him. Why can't you learn a freaking takedown? Like, holy moly. Like, just learn how to take someone down. Once you get them down, they will not get up and you win the fight. Like, it's so easy, you know, but they refuse. How complicated is that journey? So, like, Donna, her that you mentioned, CrAig Jones, they're big on wrestling as part of Jiu Jitsu now. Like, wrestling not just on the feet, but wrestling from the bottom coming up and all that kind of stuff. So how difficult is that whole skillset, would you say, for jujitsu person to learn? Um, not that hard if they really put their mind to it, because they already, like, when you grapple and this is any grappling art, like, there's a certain part of it that you kind of get, and it can. Might not be the exact same thing, but you understand how your body moves and how to feel certain pressures, and you can adapt yourself pretty quickly, you know? So I don't think. I think there's just a certain level of stubbornness where they didn't want to. Certain people didn't want to do it for whatever reason. I think a lot of times in MMA is the I'm so macho, I can stand and bang thing, you know, where they want, you know, show how much. Oh, they are. But, yeah, that was a frustrating one, that they. There's a lot of wrestlers who became highly proficient in Jujitsu and really adapted, and it doesn't go the other way. And then, I guess the other thing there, too, is. But they can both steal from each other, right? As any. As any martial art can steal from another. And I feel like jiu Jitsu didn't do enough stealing from wrestling. Like, they should have looked at all the wrestling possible and said, well, why don't we steal that and that and, like, hey, let's take that over. And maybe we'd make a little tweak because it's different, but there's something we can definitely use there. So, like, in wrestling, for example, you know, there's a one arm guillotine in Jinnah, right? Okay. So there's a move called. Well, it's got harder names, like the oldest move in wrestling, because it's what they did, the cows, where they go around the chin and they throw them on their back. I don't recall that one. I don't know. Okay, sorry. Did you just ask me what I call that one? Yeah. Would you take a cow and grab it by the side? No, but in wrestling, I don't know. Okay. We call you putting it under. Yeah. So you grab their chin, and then you go under their arm, and then throw them on their back. Okay. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. So we call that the honey badger. But it's got honey badger. Different names. Wherever you go, it's got different names. So I would always. I would say, like, pre jiu jitsu, I was. I was AveRage at it. Like, I could do it, but against good people, you'd never get it for. Because I'll tell you what. Because they would get the back of their head up, and they're too strong where you couldn't collapse them by going over their neck. Right. Because the forces weren't. Right. So then in Jiu Jitsu, you learn the one arm GuillOtine, where you grab their Chin, and this is more of running along the side of their head. And then. And then you go here and you choke them. Right. Much more efficient way to move their head because the fulcrum is way down here, and their head can move into that. Right? So once I learned that in Jiu JItsu, I'm like, wait, I can do this in wrestling. So now once I learn how to grab their chin the right WAy and I do the HONey Badger, no one ever gets out. I just had to steal that JuJitsu, put it in wrestling, and boom, there we go. But very few people steal any direction. That takes creativity, really, and open mindedness. So easy because it's already done. You just got steal it. I mean, same with judo. If you're a Gi jutsu person, there's so much stuff in judo that that's ripe for the stealing, because judo is much more emphasizes explosive moves on the transition, which is something jiu jitsu does. Not do, because you have seen from the takedown, too. From the takedown, but also just in general, just in the transition. The. The concept of transition, the, like, jujitsu is very much about, like, we're in this position, then we're in this position, then we're in this position. Yeah. The. The judo is much more in when it. When there's chaos of any kind. Yeah. That's when you need to strike and to learn that. I mean, that's why people like Travis Stevens and Judoka, when they go to Jiu jitsu, they can dominate. But jiu jitsu, people should steal, too. Stubborn. Yeah, but so is every wrestlers are stubborn, too. No way. There would never be any stubborn wrestlers. Well, I mean, I was surprised, you know, all these coaches, John Smith, Dan Gable, they don't really have interest in MMA or Jiu Jitsu and so on, like. But you would think somebody like a John Smith would, like, put on a white belt and roll around. Yeah, I think he's just too focused on, you know, he's a coach. What he's a coach and what he's doing. Yeah. I mean, yeah, I think if you. If you take him when he's younger, he would have had a lot of fun. We actually have a really good wrestler making his MMA debut tomorrow, and if you bo nickel, I'm sure you've heard of him. Very high level. I think he's going to have a lot of success. I mean, some people might say that, like, jiu Jitsu makes you a little comfortable being in your back, and for a wrestler, that could be, like, really bad. I hate that take. Yeah, but that's the Dan Gable take. It's so stupid. It's so stupid. For God's sakes, we know the fucking rules. Wrestling, you don't go to your back. And Jujitsu, you can. It's like, whatever. Yeah. But, like, jiu Jitsu, for example. So I coached, when I was at Rufus, I coached the wrestling for long, three, four, five years. So I've been taking a jujitsu guy and teaching them a wrestling technique where you needed to use your feet to teach jiu jitsu. Guy is so easy, so simple, because they already understand the concept. Butterfly guard, etcetera, et cetera, et cetera. Right. To take a wrestler who's never done any of it and teach him how to use his feet. Oh, my God, it's such a beast. It's so hard, you know, because they just, that's not a weapon they're thinking about using. So it's like, we understand the rules. It's like freestyle. Focus on wrestling. Freestyle for the man. I can lock my hands. You don't see people locking their hands all the time in folk style just because they did freestyle. It's like, they get it. There's a rule. They understand it. So the notion that somehow you get. Comfortable in your back, but pinning, that's like a. It has a special meaning. Yeah, I actually think so. Jiu jitsu, you. You don't actually want to be. Right. Flat, flat very often. Right. You want to be. I always wondered this because I did a couple catch wrestling tournaments, and I did, I would put myself in butterfly guard, and I wasn't going against good people, so, which is why I was doing all these things. But I wondered if you could create a system of wrestling where you're butterfly guard. So I think there's, there's a few places where I use it, but so, specifically, the elevator series, which is my main series, up bottom. It is. It's not butterfly guard. It's a butterfly guard like, grip with your foot. So I boom. I go here, I catch your leg with my foot. Boom. And I elevate you over. Right? Um, and then also sometimes, like, uh, I think Keegan does it, too, from watching me. But double leg sometimes if I'm accepting. So, freestyle, obviously, you're gonna give a point. You focus up, accepting that you've already got me. And as I go down, I'm just gonna butterfly guard you up, you know, and then I'm gonna try to flip my hip back to the mat and get, end up in a wizard position. Like, I've used that quite a few times, where it's kind of like a bailout mechanism that gives me back to maybe not a great position, but obviously much better. Than being taken down. Beautiful. Yeah. Let me ask you quickly about crypto, because you're also, you have a, you have a show, you have a lot of interest in cryptocurrency. Why are you interested in cryptocurrency? Is it just a financial investment or philosophy that attracts you to it? So I, my friend told me about it in 2017. I was actually, I went to, I was, I was, my friend met me in Shanghai. I fought in one championship, and he told me, and the second he told me, I'm like, I'm so in. Because I had read Ron Paul and the Fed, I had read, I kind of had an understanding how the Fed is unfair. And so when he told about crypto, this decentralized system that no one has control over, it just made sense. And so we've, the podcast, we had to say Michael Saylor on it, and I love the way he says, it's like, who do you trust more with your money? You trust the politicians or do you trust engineers? I think that's an easy choice. I don't even think, I don't even think I have to think about that. I don't trust politicians. No matter what country they come from, China, America, wherever, I don't trust them. So. So what about into, in 2017? What was it, bitcoin? Are you, what do you, what do you find? Which ones do you find interesting? Yeah, there's all kinds of ideas. So there's the, the more sort of primal mechanism of proof of work and bitcoin, and then there's smart contracts, ideas, and there's all kinds of innovations across the different. So I can't say I'm in super deep where I understand the technical components of a lot of them. I understand what bitcoin can do for people. And so that's probably the one I focus the most on. And I actually, I think I was talking about, I was trying to convince Michael to talk about bitcoin because he hates it also when he did it last night. And I think most of the main problems bitcoin solves, people in America are so american centric, they don't understand it. So, like, high levels of inflation, that hasn't happened in what's starting to happen. It hasn't happened in America in a long time. Right. But someone in Venezuela is like, oh, I get that. You know, or remittance payments. Right. Remittance payments to, you see it. So I saw this in, when I was spending all time in Singapore. Singapore is obviously a really wealthy country, and so you'd have indonesian workers or Filipino, and they would all go on Sundays. They would go to these places to ship stuff back to their families. And through Western Union. Western union gouges the shit out of these people. I mean, they're taking 810, 12% of whatever they're sending. Then it takes five days and the person's gonna pick it up. Whereas bitcoin, I could send you bitcoin person to person. Right? So like, american people don't understand that. American people don't really understand the unbanked, right. A decent portion of the world is unbanked. They don't have access to it. And a much, much, much smaller portion of the world doesn't have access to Internet. So if I can put a mobile wallet on your phone and we can send money person to person. So there's a whole bunch of those problems where Americans don't really think about that, are really obvious that this solves. So I think that's a key one. Obviously, the fact that the value goes up is really outstanding also. But if you look at it, I got in in 2017, so I got to watch it go up. I didn't sell shit at the top. Really stupid. And then the majority of my time was spent through the bear market. And so I had to love it for the principles that it provided, not the fact that actually I actually lost money in the beginning and now im way up. But yeah, so I just holding, just holding. I think at the top of this bull market, ill probably sell a very small portion. You mean like right now theres a bull market? Yeah. Most people think, say in the next three to six months will be the top of the market. And so probably when that happens, I'll probably sell a little bit. You gotta hodl it, Ben. You gotta ho well, yeah, so my pod, one of my podcast co hosts, he's like super Rich, like Uber rich. So he has lost touch with the everyman. Yeah. So here's my argument to him. It's really simple. And listen, I'm doing well for myself in life. But if, say someone buys a bitcoin, right, one bitcoin at $5,000, which it was last year, and this bitcoin goes from five thousand dollars to two hundred thousand dollars, which is right around what a lot of people think the peak is going to be. They bought one bitcoin and they are living in a $200,000 house. So to take half of that, you started $5,000 of bitcoin to sell half a bitcoin for $100,000 and pay off your house, your remaining house payment. That's life changing to someone. It really is. You still have a bitcoin. So if bitcoin goes to a million, you're still going to have half a million, and you're going to feel really, really rich with that half a million dollars because you bought it for having $2,500, you know. Yeah. So, yeah. So I would encourage anyone who's not uber rich to, if you have huge profits, take a little bit of them, because it could change your life. And if you hold it and it goes down, you're going to feel the pain of that. Like, sometimes if you're more constrained financially, it's much more psychologically difficult to ride the ups and downs. Yeah, it is. For sure. They have these really fascinating things in bitcoin. We said the guy, one of the main guys on our podcast, it's called on chain metrics. So all. All wallet transactions are visible, you know, and so they have these. All these fun categories. So I actually. I think you said you don't like. Numbers, but I like numbers. Oh, you love numbers. So I love numbers also. So they have all these different categories. Like, you can see how long a wallet has held a bitcoin. Right. Or how many bitcoins are in a certain wallet. And so what they've seen during this downturn. Right. So April, it kind of peaked and went down, is that the whales are still buy. So whales, people of a thousand or more are still buying. They've said the main group of sellers is the ones who held it from zero to three months. So, like, they don't have money. They bought it because they thought it was going up. And I was like, oh, shit, I got to sell it, right. Whereas anyone who's held for a long time is generally still holding on to it. That's interesting. That's a good indicator, right? For the whole space, yeah. Well, let me ask you for some advice. You've been through one heck of a career, one heck of a life. What advice would you give to a young person today? Well, in wrestling, I think wrestling is really a microcosm of what your life's going to be. And that's why one of the things that I stress the kids is, like, if we can go through this now, and you figure I have a couple kids who are struggling with certain things right now, if you can figure out this now and wrestling, it's gonna be a lot better to figure out now and get over this mental hump than when you're 32 and you have two kids and. Right. And your job's not going well. It's gonna be a lot worse. Could be a lot more painful then let's. Let's fucking figure it out now. So a lot of these things, a lot of these lessons we learn from wrestling, whether it's persistence or perseverance or work ethic or, you know, I said, wrestlers show up on time and they work hard. Right. These things, if we learn these things at an early age, those are generally those characteristics. Those characteristics will generally carry on throughout our life, and those are the things that are going to make us really successful. So, um, you know, I would say find a great coach, someone who's going to spend a lot of time and put a lot of time into you and make sure they have a lot of wisdom and steal all the wisdom that you can from them. And then if you can be successful at one thing, generally, whatever that recipe was that took you to be successful at that, apply it to everything else. Right? Apply it to the rest of your life. Apply it to getting a life that you enjoy. Apply it to living in a place you want to live, doing a job you want to do. Right. There's so many possibilities, and you just have to be bold enough to go take those chances. It's interesting because early on in life is when you have much more time. People don't realize this time to learn the lessons. Somehow later in life, you get busier responsibilities and all that kind of stuff. Like high school is a magical time in college. Yeah, there's so much time. Right. Learn. Well, you don't even have kids yet. Yeah, I don't have kids. Still fills up. Well, no, I. On purpose, and I did something that many people don't seem to be able to do. I walked away from a lot of responsibilities just by saying goodbye. Okay. But like. But, you know, meetings, like, there's everybody around me at MIT was like, meetings fill the day, and then you have more projects and you do a great job and you become successful, and then more meetings fill the day and more responsibilities, as opposed to, like, wait a minute, do I want to be involved in all these things? And instead do I want to find one or two things to really focus on? And that's what I choose. But, like, that becomes harder and harder and harder as you get older. No, I mean, I'm sure. And also, the more success you have, you become sought after other places, too. I'm sure that's happening with you. And it's hard to keep saying, no, no, no. Saying that was hard yeah. You're known for roasting people with a single boom, roasted line. So any ideas? Maybe you want to mention malice, but any ideas come to mind when you. Look at me, man, you know what? If I was going to, boom, roast someone, I would want to kind of, like, research their career and dissect them and figure out their biggest negative, get to the core. And I didn't have that notion with you. I figured I got a general sense of, okay, he's really successful. He's super sharp. He's really interested in some really interesting things. I bet we'll have a great conversation. But I had no intention to roast you. Yeah, there you go. What about malice? You had dinner with him last night. Hmm? For him? Oh, man. How'd you get to know him, by the way? Just Twitter. Just Twitter. Where's the most magical place in the world, right? I always tell people it's a great source of information if you know how to use it. Hmm. He's insane on Twitter. Actually, I had to unfollow him on Twitter because he was too intense, too much. It fills up, like, I want to be able to consume the content. So if I want to see something, he says, I can go to his page, right? But it's just too much for my timeline. I want to be able to consume who I follow. So I try to not follow a lot of people because I want to be able to consume them. And he was. He was. He was too much. He fights the trolls, which I don't know why you would ever fight the trolls. There's just a too many of them. Well, he's a troll himself. He's like the big troll fighting the little trolls. He's the king troll. There's a million of them. So even if you kill, if you kill 100,000, there's still 900,000. It's the, like, the night walker or whatever. Yeah. Well, I'll take it, because you had nothing you could, you couldn't rose GSP out of respect. Yeah, I'm just gonna take that as a sign of respect. What do you say? Bad about GSP. I was. Now I try to roast his hair. Like, why is he trying to grow. Grow hair now after all these years? He looked good bald. Everyone loved him with his head shaved. Yeah. Now it looks kind of strange, like, why you got hair now? Well, it was one of the more surreal moments of my life is. So he was here, and he wore a black suit and tie. Oh, really? Yeah. We did the podcast with him. Just mirror image of me and then we also did. I haven't released it yet, but just a video together, and I was doing a martial arts stuff in the suit and tie, those quits. That was quite. That's like, certain moments in your life are just like, I can't believe I was part of that. Yeah. From. With GSP. So, yeah, I don't think I have anything to roast him about. I mean, maybe the Matt Serra thing would be the one that you get him with, you know, but, yeah. I would be really fascinated to, like, really dig deep from a sports psychology standpoint, because he always talks about how much fury he had when he was competing. And I. And I find that to be interesting because, obviously. So it's almost like, to me, it's almost like, was he successful despite that? Not because of that. Right. And because anxiety usually leads it. Really negative performance for the majority of people. And what was it about him that the anxiety wasn't super negative? You know what I'm saying? Like, it's very interesting. I wonder that, too. So I have. I wondered that about him, but I have a huge amount of anxiety interacting, especially with people. Just about everything. Yeah. I wonder if that's helpful or not. It feels that, like, it's very helpful. Well, I think so. I. So, okay. I think in two different. So I think probably your everyday life. Okay, is different than, like, in a performance or a competition. It's. You have to be, like, super in the moment of what you're doing. So anything that's pulling you away, like, oh, my gosh, you know, high school kids, right. That coach. Oh, my gosh, my. That girl's in the stands. And if I get beat, then. And they're actually. They're actively thinking about this other thing when this is going on. And I need all 100% of your focus. Well, he's never. I don't think he has anxiety in the ring. That's the point. I think, like, I have the same thing. Like, if I have a really high performance thing that I have to do, I don't know, election front of a lot of people. Yeah. That'd be a great example that there's huge amount of anxiety weeks ahead, days ahead, hours ahead. So you have a system to get rid of it, then. Maybe. But it's just the body gets rid of it somehow. Yeah. There's not a system. Subconscious system. Yeah. It's so you don't actually have anxiety while you're. So that's like. So then that problem. Somehow that problem has solved itself. Right. The problem is when the anxiety is actually happening while the wrestling match is happening. That's the real issue. Yeah, but it's, like, sneaks in there, too. That's the difference between MMA and wrestling, is there's no breaks in wrestling, right? Yes, I guess there is. You can look at the crowd a little bit. Like, you can look. So maybe. But, like, the. There's other things we have to perform while there's more breaks. Like a lecture. You can catch yourself thinking, like, in this conversation, you know? Yeah. Like, I'll set a bunch of stuff where I think, why the hell did you say that? That's dumb, right? That that's the anxiety, because there's a pause and that. That. That could be. I don't know. I think it just pushes me to be better, but maybe I could be way better if I let go that. Yeah, it's scary to think that GSB. If you let go that he's been. Better or did he ever. Did. Did he have a route? Like, you're saying, like, you don't necessarily feel those. So I think certain people that I've coached, like, they would describe how they would feel literally during the wrestling match. Right. And you're saying, like, during the speech performance, it's mostly gone. Yep. And that's. That's. It'd be interesting to see if, like, you know, he talked a lot about that, but if it was all. If it was all the way somehow gone. And he means he would have a mechanism for it. So, like, I had a really bad performance my freshman year of high school at nationals because I had. I had the ability to be anxious, and one of my coaches talked about, like. And a lot of a type personalities are kind of that way, you know, because they're trying to consider all possibilities at the same time. And while we're actually performing or competing, it's negative to performance. Right. So he said he would always. Leading up to the match, within, say, an hour, he would. His thing was talking about fishing. He would get someone talk about fishing with him because it would stop him thinking about the match and being uber anxious. So I kind of really took that heart, and it really helped me as I would always, like, have someone to talk to and just. Just goof around about whatever. So I'm not thinking about this thing, and then once I step in, it's time to go. So I didn't have this, like, anxious buildup. Now it's not for me. I took it away. But, like, me, you know, like you said, you have a way to get it away, obviously. Cause it's yeah, I guess so. I guess there's little, little tricks you come up with. Yeah, you start thinking about it's not fishing. Maybe I should try the fishing thing. But I hate fishing. So boring. Well, maybe. Maybe it's good to think about that. All right, Ben, this is like I told you, I'm a big fan. I'm a big fan of your wrestling, your fighting, your personality. Thank you for coming down. Thank you for talking today. Huge honor. Bam. Let's go wrestle. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Ben Askren. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Muhammad Ali. Only a man who knows what it is like to be defeated can reach down to the bottom of his soul and come up with the extra ounce of power it takes to win when the match is even. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.

Utterances:
Speaker A: The following is a conversation with Ben Askren, wrestler, MMA fighter, and a brilliant, opinionated and fun personality in the world of martial arts. And yes, he occasionally likes to talk a little trash. Given his wild online antics and his boxing match with Jake Paul, some people may forget just how dominant he was in the sport of wrestling and in MMA. For most of his career in wrestling, he is a two time NCAA Division one national champion and four time finalist in mixed martial arts. He went undefeated for ten years with a record of 190 before losing to Jorge Masvidal with a flying knee that caught everyone by surprise. He's also into cryptocurrency, disc golf, and is the co host of Flow Wrestling Radio Live. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now here's my conversation with Ben Askren. Before we talk about your incredible wrestling career, your MMA career, let me ask you, I have to ask you, what did you think about the Jake Paul versus Tyron Woodley fight?
Speaker B: Well, I thought, I mean, I'm obviously biased. I thought Tyrone wondehen, I had five rounds of three. And again, this, maybe this is my bias in the way I was seeing it. I thought he was more effective with the striking and he was more aggressive. Jake had more volume, but that was the only thing I would give him. And I guess a lot of people just didn't see it that way. They thought he landed significant more punches. I just didn't think really did any damage.
Speaker A: It was a split decision.
Speaker B: Split decision? Yeah.
Speaker A: Were you surprised?
Speaker B: Well, so the thing I said when I went in to fight him is that we don't really. Maybe he's good, maybe he's not. We have no, we really have no idea to this point, you know? And so I knew Tyron was a lot better boxing than I was, and so I thought, okay, Tyron's, there's, I think there's a good likelihood that Tyron beats him up, but there's the chance that Jake's kind of good at this. And I think that's kind of what played out is he's kind of good at it. Even if you saw it the way I saw it, he still was impressive in his showing and he, he's obviously put a lot of time into it, so he's, he's not bad, we'll say that much, you know, but isn't it.
Speaker A: Surprising to you that like a elite level athlete, combat athlete, lost to somebody who just takes it really seriously, but is nevertheless not elite level?
Speaker B: Um hmm. But I think boxing is a really specific rule set. So let's speak about Tyrann, not myself. Tyron had good striking, but obviously it was his first boxing match ever. And within mixed martial arts, you have the fear of the takedown and the fear of the kick and fear of other things to go along with the punching. And so if you look at Tyrone throughout his MMA career, a lot of times what set up his punches were like, level change fakes at a takedown, they dropped. Boom. And then something comes over the top, right? So there's many more elements to worry about in mixed martial arts, whereas boxing, there's only one. It was his first fight. Yes. I thought Hiram was going to win. I thought this was going to happen. But like I said, I mean, it's pretty evident that Jakes, he's not bad at boxing. He's pretty solid. You know, he gets in there and works hard at it, I guess.
Speaker A: Out of ten times. How many times do you think Jake wins against Tyron? Against Tyron, they fight again and again and again, like, iteratively.
Speaker B: Yeah. So, I mean, I. Part of the thing is. Okay, so Jake's corner said you need a knockout going into the 8th round, right? So I think they thought maybe they're trying to motivate him, but I don't see it that way, because if they were actually thought that he was winning, why would they encourage him to take a dumb risk when Tyron has clearly his knockout power? Right. It's a really stupid coaching philosophy, if that's what you're thinking. So you obviously are thinking, hey, this is actually in the balance. It's competitive. And I feel like Tyron thought maybe he was winning and didn't have the urgency necessary, and so I think there's a chance he turns it up a lot. Hmm. Man, I would want to watch him again before I. So I have this problem with my personality. Here's my personality, Lex. I have an issue with not being able to give really exact answers. So I hate giving you an answer that, like, I don't feel like is 100% calculated. So I would like to see them go once more. Cause I would like to see, hey, can Tyron if. Because if Tyron can turn up the pace and Jay can't handle it, then I think it's an eight one or nine two. Right. Um, if it goes the exact same way, and maybe Tyrone was a close split decision, I'm saying, oh, it's probably close every single time. We're probably gonna get a five to five type of thing, you know, so it's like, I feel like out of one match, it's not totally indicative of what the future is gonna look like.
Speaker A: I feel like Tyrone would get a knockout and then you would still be in the same place. Like, not. Not knowing. Not knowing what to predict. Okay, so your fight with Jake Paul, looking back, you have had a little bit of time now. How would you analyze that fight?
Speaker B: Well, I mean, the fight specifically, I got cracked with an overhand right. So, I mean, it kind of sucks, I would say. You know, and this is where everyone, like, I really don't care. And everyone's like, why did you turn your reputation? It's like, well, I wanted to do it. I had an enjoyable time training, and in the build up, obviously, I wasn't skillful enough to get the win, but if I even despite the fact that I know what happened, if someone asked me to do it again, I probably would've done it again, you know? And so the way I was thinking about when I was deciding whether to do it or not. Cause I got the offer, it's like, okay, is this money? It can change my life. Yeah, it could. Right? It's not gonna double my net worth, but it's gonna add significantly, make my life easier. Number two is, like, when I was in high school, we used to do boxing matches for free just cause we thought it was fun. We didn't have something going on. Friday night, me and my buddies would get together and we had some boxing goes in my basement and we'd punch each other in the head. So it's like, for something I think is enjoyable and not pay me a whole bunch of money. Yeah, sure, I'll do it.
Speaker A: Would you, do you think if you got the rematch, if you did the rematch, would you, what are the odds you win? Okay, let's.
Speaker B: Probably not very good. I think he's pretty good, actually. And I'm not very good. And that was probably at a low point for me because. So when I started training for that, I was like, 215 pounds, which is the heaviest I've ever been. I came off my hip surgery. I literally, like, when I said yes, like, I'll do it. Like, I had literally started working out, like, the week before for the first time in my, you know, instance of surgery. Cause I wasn't able to do anything. So could I. Could I perform better? Yeah. But now after watching in box Tyron, like, if you ask me, Ben, can you beat Tyron? Probably. Probably not. I don't think I can beat Tyrone. So. In boxer. Correct. In boxing, yeah. So my chances of beating him, you know, and watching that card, it's like, damn. Like, kind of be fun to box someone who I know sucks, who I know can beat. That's what would be fun, you know? Cause, like, the training, the preparation was fun, but then obviously, I got my butt kicked. That fuck, that sucked. You know? Could I swear on this podcast?
Speaker A: Yeah, of course.
Speaker B: Okay. Well, I was gonna drop an f bomb. I wasn't quite sure.
Speaker A: I thought you sucked. Isa swear. No, no, you could drop all of the f bombs you want. So, preparation wise, do you think you were more prepared for that fight or the Jordan Burroughs exhibition? I mean, like, how did you approach it mentally, you know?
Speaker B: Well, the Burroughs thing, I. Obviously, it's okay. So when I retired the first time in 2017, Burroughs was the only current, like, we'll say, really elite level wrestler that I'd never trained with. I was really good friends with Nebraska head assistance coach, still am. And I said, hey, I just want. I'm gonna pay my own way. I wanna come down, train with Jordan. Cause I wanna see what it feels like, you know, I want to get in there and mix it up. I mix it up with David Taylor and Kyle Dake. I mean, there's just something about wrestling that I love. And so I flew myself down there in January of 2018, and I spent four days training with Jordan. It was a really good time. It gave me some great insight into how he thinks, and, you know, what a great champion he is.
Speaker A: What was it like training with him? Like, what. Can you give some insights?
Speaker B: Of course.
Speaker A: Like, what the. Like, how hard is. Is the live training? Is it more drilling? Is it technical? Like, how does his. It seems like his style is very different than yours. So how does that match up in the room in terms of, like, what you learned from each other? That kind of thing?
Speaker B: We only went full live for one, I think was like a twelve or 15 minutes go where it was just go wrestle. We did a bunch of simulated live, but obviously he had. So I was a senior in college when he was a freshman in Nebraska, and so our teams had dueled each other. He was obviously a lot smaller at that point in time, but he had followed my career. And so when I went in there, it was like, hey, I know you're really good at this position. What about this position? What are you trying to do? How exactly does it work? And then let's wrestle there, you know, and then, hey, what about this position? And so, you know, we would spend 30 to 40 minutes talking about that position. On the ground, or it was like one was a chest rap, one wasn't for headlock, one. Washington. I don't really. It's called the. We call it the lightning dump, but it's a lightning dump. Yeah. My buddy's name was lightning Luke Smith in high school, and he was the first person I saw do it. So usually when I see someone do something, then I named that move after them.
Speaker A: Got it.
Speaker B: I know, right? Great name.
Speaker A: It's a good.
Speaker B: So, uh. Yeah, but so what I said with that is like, he was still trying to be the best in the world. I was just trying to go work out Jordan Burrows, because I enjoy wrestling.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Is like, someone who, at that point, when he has five world titles, at that, four or five. At that point, a lot. And so I use it with my high school kids, is like, hey, this is a guy who's the best in the world, who's bringing someone in and saying, how do I do this? How do I do that? What about this? What about that? And so the level of inquisitive. Inquisitive, that's a hard word. Inquisitiveness he has is really impressive. And then it's obvious why he got to the level he did, because he's figuring out all these little situations, and that's a, honestly, one of the biggest things I think wrestlers, a lot of wrestlers fail to do as they get older, even when they get to early college age, they say, this is my style. This is what I do. I'm going to lift and work out hard, and I'm. And I'm not going to anything to my game, you know, whereas you've seen many progressions in Jordan Burrows game, he just made his 10th world team. And you and I, you know, if you have a really keen eye, you've been able to watch him change. You know, I've been watching him since 2007. He's changed so much and obviously still maintained a world class level almost the entire time.
Speaker A: When you say change, like, what changed? Cause he's got that double leg, but.
Speaker B: There'S not double anymore.
Speaker A: What's that?
Speaker B: He, like, hit his double leg for the first time against Alex Deirdre. He hadn't hit it in years. Yeah. So that's, like, when people think about Jordan Bros. They think about the double leg. Cause in his early years, fire. He had a great double leg. Right. And even so, in those years, I would say the. The biggest thing with Jordan Bros. Double leg wasn't his level of explosiveness. It was his level of persistence. He would shoot and shoot and shoot and shoot. And it would last time to be from fun, creative angles and out of scrambles.
Speaker A: Boop.
Speaker B: All of a sudden, he's on you, you know, and just. He was just super persistent with it, and I think that was probably the key. And then you saw, you know, when he came out to won the first world championships in 2011, it was kind of that type of mentality. And then shortly after, then obviously, everyone was starting to lower their stance, getting lower. And he developed a really good, like, mantis go behind series where he would go one way, the other way. Then he started developing really good, like, low single ankle pick type thing, you know? And then his hand. His hand fighting got really tremendous. Like, 15, 1617. His hand fighting was really good. And now I just commented, the 21 trials, like, a few of the defensive sequences he got into, it's like, holy shit. Like, just not from an athletic standpoint, from a technical standpoint, the things he were doing was just tremendous. So I've seen him as someone, like, who's continuing to reinvent themselves over the course of the last 1012 years, especially.
Speaker A: As a junior and senior in college, you were exceptionally dominant. If you were to face him at both of your peaks of NCAA wrestling, could you beat him? And if you can beat him, of course you can beat him. How do you solve the Jordan Burroughs puzzle?
Speaker B: Well, so for a folk style wrestling standpoint.
Speaker A: Folk style?
Speaker B: Yes, folk style. You know, he. He had some competitive matches. His junior, senior year. He had a two one win over, or maybe three two over Michael Chandler, who was my teammate who's fighting UFC now. He had a two and one over title called. Well. So I think you can glean some insight into that. You know, he got ridden. He got so mad about this up on the podcast. So during Krono, we had to make up all kinds of bullshit to talk about.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: And we were doing, like, the last ten years best one hundred sixty five s. And I said Kyle Dake would ride him for over a minute.
Speaker A: Oh, wow.
Speaker B: He got so mad, he wanted to come on the podcast the next day. So hopefully he doesn't listen to this. Fuck you, Mandev. You know, but, you know.
Speaker A: When was this? This is during Corona.
Speaker B: Corona last year. He got mad. We were talking about. We were.
Speaker A: Before the trials.
Speaker B: Yeah, correct. Yeah. So Michael Chandler wrote him for two minutes plus, and that was his junior year, not a senior year.
Speaker A: Sure.
Speaker B: Right. But it's close. So I think there's some things there. I think the interesting thing would be, if I would have stuck around. Right. So I chose to go into mixed martial arts after 2008, I would've been 74, and he would've been 74, so we would have to wrestle. And then I think that the freestyle Jordan Burroughs puzzle is a lot more difficult to solve than the folk style Jordan Burroughs puzzle. And I think. I don't think he would. I think he would acknowledge that he's much better at freestyle than he was at folk style. You know, although he was very good. He's better.
Speaker A: This is, like, raw speed, explosiveness, present a problem to you.
Speaker B: Well, so he was never. I mean, he didn't really excel on the mat in kind of either style. In freestyle, he has got some good lace transitions, but in folks that, like, his whole. Like, in his entire college career, I think he has, like, ten pins, which is almost nothing, you know? So he was gaining no value off the top position. He was good enough on most people to get off bottom without it being an issue, but it wasn't like, oh, my gosh, this is an area where we really have to be careful. There's a lot of things here, you know, it's just. He wasn't gaining value there. Whereas in freestyle, he. I don't want to say never, but the amount of times he gets turned is incredibly rare. Very, very rare. Um, and he does have, like, laser transitions, so he gets a lot of points there, so. And obviously, freestyle is. It can be geared way more in the neutral position. Right, where we're only doing takedowns, so. Yeah.
Speaker A: Were you surprised that he lost to Dake in the trials? To Kyle Dake?
Speaker B: No, Kyle's so. So he's so good. Right? I mean, I think. I think his performance at the Olympics was. Was his loss then was shocking to. I mean, we never seen it happen to Kyle Dake. You know, he's been a guy who's competed with Jordan Burroughs forever, and obviously, he was on the losing side for a while, and now he's on the winning side. But I think a lot of people thought it was a coin flip, and I think, actually, Kyle Dick made it feel like it's not a coin flip now. To me, it feels like Kyle Digg is going to win that match significantly more times than he isn't, is what it feels like.
Speaker A: Yeah. I forgot which trials it was. Was it four years ago, or Kyle Dake threw him? Like, he. You saw inklings of, like, oh, wow. There might be eventually a changing of the guard.
Speaker B: Yeah. So, 13, Kyle came out, and he had the one throw, but then he lost one of the matches decisively. And then he was hurt in 14. And in 16, Kyle Digg actually went up to 86 kg. So in. Actually in 16 at the trials, we had. So Jake Herbert was number one seed. He was former as Guy Russell. I was a former world silver medalist. So you had David Taylor, who had not made a team yet, who is now a world champion, Olympic champion. You had Kyle Dake in the bracket, who was a two time world champion now. And you had Jayden Cox in the bracket, who had not made any teams yet, but is now, what, a four time world medals, two time world champion. And then obviously, Jaden came out on top of that, won his first Olympic medal, Olympic bronze medal. So Kyle didn't wrestle Jordan in 16, and Jordan and Kyle's contention the whole time. And they argued about this. So I actually did a little bit of backstabbing. Well, it's not backstabbing.
Speaker A: And both of them were just one of them.
Speaker B: I didn't tell any of them. Okay, so Jordan got mad when we talked. We talked about this fake match for in Krona, right? Yeah, we had to make. We had to make up something to talk about. Yeah, there's obviously no matches. So we talked about this fake match.
Speaker A: And do you stand behind that statement, by the way?
Speaker B: Here's what I said. Kyle, Dick, Kyle Dick's four time NCAA champion. Yes. I said, you gotta pick a. You gotta pick a winner. I said, Kyle Dick wins two one on a minute and six ride time, which, I mean, is literally, we're talking as close as it gets. As close as it gets for Kyle Dick, who's a four time NCAA champion.
Speaker A: I'm sorry. We're talking over Jordan Burroughs, over Jordan.
Speaker B: Burrows in a folks now match.
Speaker A: In a folks down match. College or hypothetical now or in college?
Speaker B: In college. Both of them at their peaks at 165 pounds. So completely hypothetical. And so Jordan called in. He was all pissed at me for picking Kyle Dake. He wants to come on the next day and argue his point. So I said, f that. That's dumb. We had to pick a winner. We had to do something hypothetical. So I called Kyle Dake and I said, kyle, jordan's gonna come on and argue his case in the morning. If he's gonna do that, why don't you come in and argue your case? So no one else knew Kyle was coming on the podcast. So they both show up. They went at it. But one of the contentions Kyle had for years, and there's still this rule. If you win a world level medal the following year, you sit out until the very end of the american trials, and they do a best two or three. So every time. Previously that Kyle had wrestled Jordan, he had to come through a tournament on Saturday. Okay, probably three matches. And then on Sunday, he would wrestle Jordan in the best two out of three. Right. So his contention was, I'm only wrestling Jordan at a disadvantage because I have to compete on Saturday. And then competing, which. It's a fair argument, it really is. But I also see USA Wrestling's point is, like, if someone wins a world medal, we're going to reward them because we want that person on the team again.
Speaker A: So it's crazy, though, that you're like, Kyle Dake had to wrestle because he's not wrestling bums in that.
Speaker B: Bums, yeah.
Speaker A: And, yeah. I don't know. I don't know how wrestlers do it, because you have to go to war, like, three matches and then face Jordan Burrows.
Speaker B: Especially a few of those years with Dake had the name Andrew Howe, but those were really competitive matches. David Taylor had really competitive matches with him. Isaiah Martinez even got in there, Dearinger. So he had some really competitive matches before he ever got to Jordan Burroughs. So I never answered. Your initial question was, how did I feel? So the Jordan Burroughs match, I was nothing in wrestling shape at all, meaning wrestling's heavily dependent, especially neutral positions, heavily dependent on timing and other things. I was wrestling very, very minimally. Cause I was. I started fighting again. So, like, my. My athletic shape was great, but it was mainly for fighting. I wasn't wrestling. So I think they were actually trying to do Burroughs Dake at the beat the streets. It's a big. It's the biggest fundraisers in wrestling every.
Speaker A: Single year in New York.
Speaker B: In New York City, usually raise, like, a million dollars. They started all these programs in New York City to get. Which I really wonder what they're doing with the money now, because they probably can't have the kids wrestling because New York's crazy.
Speaker A: Anyway, I think New York figures out a way what to do with the money. Hence Michael malice complaining that they're corrupt and all that.
Speaker B: Well, no, but it goes to the beat the streets organization, who then starts the clubs in New York. So I don't know what to do with my. Anyway, so I was called, like, I don't know, two, two weeks before the event, and said, hey, you know, someone says to wrestle Jordan Burroughs, it fell out. Would you wrestle him? I said, yeah, sure, why not? You know, and it's like, listen, I trained with them for four days the year before. I had a pretty good idea how the match was going to go. It wasn't going to go so well for me, but it's like, okay, you're missing a main event I can bring because of where I'm at right now in my life. I can bring a lot of attention to wrestling. I can help you guys raise a bunch of money for beat the streets. My goal is, I think I thought I could get one takedown or turn on him was kind of my goal for the match. I didn't get there.
Speaker A: You weren't kind of hard.
Speaker B: He went hard. Yeah. Asshole. Give me a point.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: I said, this is bullshit, jordan. I told him during the match, like, this is bullshit. You're fucking going too hard right now. I'm not a wrestler. I'm not a wrestler anymore. I'm a fighter. I'm coming in here. So, yes, I had a really good idea. I mean, we wrestled together. I think he'll probably get mad because I think in the live go, we did like the twelve or 15 minutes. I think I actually scored a takedown in that, I believe. Maybe. Or maybe it was a turn. He'll probably say, no, I didn't. But whatever. Yeah. So I knew what was going to happen. I knew what the outcome was going to be. I knew I could. I was hoping to stay competitive and maybe lose like ten too, or something. Yeah.
Speaker A: Well, let's walk back. Cause I think I originally brought it up in terms of how prepared were you against Jake Paul versus Jordan Burrows? So did you prepare for Jake cardio wise?
Speaker B: Yeah, I worked hard. Yeah, I did. But it was like I told you, I started training for my. I mean, once. Once I had my hip surgery, they said, you know, for the first six weeks, you can't even walk. And it was hard for me to listen to him. Cause by week four and a half, five, I was feeling pretty good. I wanna get rid of my crutches, but I'm like, you know what? This is for the rest of my life. And if you get the. So if you get the real hip replacement, there's no wrestling, there's no nothing. Right? So that's the next step. So, okay, I'm gonna take this year. So I do my crutch of the six weeks, the next six weeks, it's still like really low weight bearing. Can't do anything, you know. So then I get done with the three months, which is like January, and I'm like, okay, I should start working out. So I started riding bike a little bit. And then, okay, I'm now I'm fat. I'm fucking fat. I'm gonna get in better shape because I don't do anything. So I'm actually start working out, and. And then that happened, right? So I'm like, okay, well, now I got three months and gives me a good reason to get back in shape. And, you know, I knew I wasn't going to be a full time boxer. So it's like, okay, how do I put a boxing camp together? So I found, you know, I had had my old teammate Mike Rhodes. He came up and kind of lived with me ish kind of thing for three months. I found a couple of this guy, canine, out of Michigan. He came over three weeks. He was great. I went to Freddie roach for a week. So I kind of like, you know, try to get as many good as ideas as I could. And my thought was like, okay, well, if this dude sucks, I can just be tough and, you know, block a few punches, get him tired, and then beat him up if he's good. That's probably not much of my due bout in the next three months. Cause I'm. I was never good at boxing in the first place. All of my standup in mixed martial arts was predicated on how do I get through the two or three punches that are gonna come at me in the time I need to get ahold of them. You know, it's only, you only have to make two or three of them miss, and then, boom, you're on top of them. At least for me. Um, that was all my striking was predicated on. It wasn't about, hey, I'm gonna do damage on the feet in order to make something else happen. It was like, how do I clear this barrier, get ahold of you, and if you. I actually did the math one time. I think I got a takedown. If you include the knockout round against Mas Vidal, I gotta take down in every round except two. So it was like, it was like 53 out of 55 rounds in MMA, I gotta take down.
Speaker A: Wow.
Speaker B: Somewhere. Somewhere in there.
Speaker A: Okay, so you're hunting to take down. Once you. Once, right away, once you get a your hands on them, you get to take down. Okay. But the incredible thing about you, I just recently talked, spent a couple of days with Jimmy Pedro, and he talked about his guys and just champions in general, hating to lose more than they love winning. And the way you talked about losing, you lost very few times in your career. Like, later, you were dominating both wrestling and MMA. But the way you took these losses against people that are, I don't know, below elite level.
Speaker B: It's fair, but it's completely fair. I thought he was a bum too.
Speaker A: No, that's not what I meant. I'm in trouble.
Speaker B: It's okay. No, it's good.
Speaker A: No, but like what. Can you explain the psychology behind that? Is there a system behind this? Is there a philosophy behind this?
Speaker B: Well, I wasn't very good in the beginning. And I think that. I think that's where it all starts from. So I didn't start getting good until the age of like 13. I started at five. I probably started competing more at age 1011. I didn't really get good till 13. And still at 13, I'm selling. I'm great. I'm getting better, right? I'm pretty good. So actually I've actually I have writing this book on sports psych. But I got someone writing for me kind of thing. Cause I've had this philosophy for years that there's. There has to be this balance between two things, right? So on the one hand, in this category. On the one hand you have hating to lose. A great champion has to hate to lose, like you said, right? But on this other hand, you have to have someone who seeks out challenges, right? Cause if you don't have that, you're never gonna reach your full potential either. And so you have to balance these two balls at the same time, right? And so, like for me, I always. And this is maybe because I wasn't good, but I was always like, let me go find the best people to wrestle all the time. Let me go find. I would like literally like 7th grade when I was starting to get better, it was like end decision Internet. Well, there was no one was using the Internet. It was like a wrestling magazine. And like, hey dad, there's a tournament here, I think that other kids gonna be there. Can you take me 2 hours across the state today, please?
Speaker A: You would wrestle like in competition against them?
Speaker B: Not in competition. Yeah, yeah, in competition. Hey, I heard there's this tournament. Here's the magazine says this tournament. Hey, dad, will you take me over there tomorrow?
Speaker A: You weren't trying to win, you were trying to get the experience.
Speaker B: I was trying to wrestle the best guys. Maybe I win, maybe I lose. There's no. When you do a competition, there's no guarantee of a win or a loss. You're just doing competition, right? So I wanted to go. I wanted to challenge myself against the best guys, of which I thought maybe I could come out on top, right? So like 8th grade year, I won way, you know, I probably lost a handful of times in the state of. Well, the state of Wisconsin was probably really, really minimal, the amount of times I lost, you know, but it was just about getting the challenge. And it's like some kids and not kids in my club, because I'll push them very hard on this, are scared of challenging themselves. They like being the big fish in the small pond. They're not willing to go say, I'm gonna. I wanna go get that guy, and I wanna get that guy, and I wanna get that guy. And so that's like. So I think that's part of it for me, is, like, I always just love the challenge. I enjoyed competing thoroughly. Right. And I understood from a young age because it wasn't very good. Losing is a part of it. You're not always gonna win. And that was kind of it. It's like, hey, sometimes, you know, and for my MMA career, I never planned it to go that way, but, yeah, I didn't lose for nine years. And, like, that's. That's pretty rare. I didn't plan for that to happen. That was just what happened.
Speaker A: Okay, but you also didn't lose, like, the second part of your college career.
Speaker B: My 87. I won my last 87 matches.
Speaker A: Yeah. So that didn't come along with the hatred of losing. You just.
Speaker B: I don't like losing. I still don't like it.
Speaker A: Yeah, yeah. Okay. But you don't. You don't seem to. You seem to kind of shrug it off a little bit.
Speaker B: Okay. So, like. But specifically with these two instances that you bring up with the masvidal, it feels definitely so. Okay.
Speaker A: All right, let's go.
Speaker B: Let's go deep. Let's keep the masvidal one. It feels different because.
Speaker A: So let's. For people don't know, masvidal loss was your first loss, first loss in MMA. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And, I mean, it was a dramatic loss.
Speaker B: Very dramatic.
Speaker A: And there was this kind of buildup as you are potentially one of the greats of all time coming into this fight. And so this pressure, all of that.
Speaker B: So then, no, I mean, I was thoroughly enjoying it. I didn't feel the pressure. So the Masvidal fight is he got one fucking move on me. It's not. He beat me. And if we do that again, I think I win at that point in my life, for sure. I think I win way, way, way more times than I lose. He knew that, too. That's why he didn't want. He didn't want to sound the battle agreement. That's why I had to taunt him and why he got so mad, because I had to continue to taunt him in order to get him to sign. Right. So that one hurt, because, as people don't know my career, I'll just go through it fast. I did three fights in, like, smaller leagues. I got signed by Bellator. I was undefeated for three and a half years. I was nine and odd when I got done with that in 2012, 2013. At that point in my head, I was just going to transition to the UFC. Cause that's where you go. I was ranked, like, six in the world. I hadn't really had a competitive match at the end of the Bellator thing. And Dana White, for a reason still unknown to me, we still haven't had this conversation. I wish I could ask him. I should ask him sometime. Chose to refuse me any entry into UFC. He just said, I went to his office, and he literally said, we're not interested. We're not going to make you an offer.
Speaker A: Did you mention something about him, about the UFC?
Speaker B: That was a year before that. That was a year before. And that might play a role in it? I think so, yes. What happened the year before that was I called him a liar. But listen, I'm right on this one, because he said, you can't test for drugs. Cause I'm all natural, which you could tell by my physique. And I was always put off by the fact that so many people cheated. And I was very vocal about that. And so he had made some statement like, oh, there's no way you could test. I said, bullshit. Very specifically. I said, USAdA does it for all other sports worldwide. You can do it. And then it's funny. Cause they hired Usada a couple years later. So I think he took some offense to that. But that was like a year and almost a year and a half. I think somewhere it was later.
Speaker A: It's not like he holds a grudge or anything.
Speaker B: Yeah, so I. So I literally go to Vegas. It's a long story. You can read about it other places. So I got released from a belt. It's not like this is negotiation. I got released from my bellator contract. I said, I'm out of here. I'm going. I'm going to the UFC. I go to Vegas. And then I was told, hey, there's no offer for you. Tough shit, you know? So then I ended up signing with one championship. I spent, what, three and a half years there. I won the belt in my second fight and retained the title the entire time. And then I just.
Speaker A: You get dominating people yeah, I didn't.
Speaker B: Have a competitive fight, and so I retired 18 and o. Never, never get. And for someone who loves a challenge, never getting to really challenge myself was incredibly frustrating. And I left the door open. I said, if I ever get the chance to prove them in this world, I'd love to come back. So somehow, a year later, I get traded. Trades have never happened, and this is the one and only trade ever. I've been retired for a year. I got traded. I get to come back. I fight Robbie Lawler the first fight I win, and then essentially they're saying, okay, if you fight, you know, if you beat George, you're gonna get the title shade against Marty. And it's like, this is, this is what I've been working for the entire. I've been trying to prove I was the best part of the world for the last ten years, and I've not been afforded this opportunity. So when I lost to George, that was hard because it was something that I had waited for for a really, really long time. It was something that I, you know, I thought I could compete for, and I never got the opportunity to do. So that one was hard at the same time from, like, just the competitive logistics. Like, he got me with one move. It wasn't like he beat my ass for 15 minutes, and I got beat a bunch of different ways. So that was like, fuck. Like, if I get it again, I could have done it, but I'm not. I'm not. They're not going to let me have it again. It's not like wrestling, where you could go the next year or the next week or whatever. You know, you lose a big tens, you go to nationals two weeks later.
Speaker A: Does that loss change you in any way? Your psychology?
Speaker B: I don't. I don't think so.
Speaker A: It's the first loss.
Speaker B: I mean, had I had I had a longer mma career post, that there definitely would have been a lot of time spent getting better at the entry point to the takedown. Right. Which I'd already spent time there. And I hate making excuses, but, yeah, the hip, the hinging of my hip, what I couldn't do was preventing me from doing some things. And it's why, if you look at the fight, I'm, like, bent over as I go for the double leg. Yeah. So I.
Speaker A: What happened for people who don't know, you went in for a double legged knee, he did a flying knee.
Speaker B: And that, and the way he caught you, well, specifically the way he did that knee was kind of different than the way anyone had thrown, flying knees before. Most people go more just from a stand straight vertical, whereas he took a few, like, running steps and went more, you know, the trajectory of the angle was different. So I think that's kind of probably why it caught. You know, I think a lot of things in combat, well, probably everything, but I focus on happen subconsciously. Like, our brain is reading what's coming at us, and lots of times it's stuff we've seen before so we can judge how to move correctly.
Speaker A: You misread because it's something you haven't seen before.
Speaker B: Had not seen anyone come at that specific angle. Yeah, so that also was really hard with the Burroughs one. I told you I knew I was gonna lose. So it was like, whatever, you know, I'm taking this because I want to put this for wrestling out there in a big way. I wanna help them raise a lot of money. We sold at Madison Square Garden, Hulu theater, and we raised a whole bunch of money. So my goals were accomplished. Jake Paul fight. I took it because they paid me a bunch of money. I thought it was gonna be fun. Did I have any illusion I was a great boxer? No illusions whatsoever. Would I have preferred to win? Absolutely. But, you know, like I told everyone, whether I win or lose on Saturday night, I'm gonna be back coaching wrestling on Monday. Cause that's what I enjoy doing. And I was back coaching wrestling on Monday. And once in a while, these middle school kids give me a little bit of shit about it, and that's it.
Speaker A: But where were you in terms of your shape and how you felt in the Masvidal fight? Would you say you're on the. I mean, it's a difficult question to ask of a world class athlete, but, like, were you past peak?
Speaker B: Oh, yeah. I don't know why guys like to lie about that. I mean, the peak for me was really, evidently, in my late twenties, and maybe they are all fueled by extra supplements, I don't know. But for me, that was evident. But you get this. So you get this crosshair where you're. If you're smart, like, you know, like I mentioned Joan Burrows was, you're still gaining wisdom, you're gaining strategy, gaining a lot of things right. And so while your physicality may go down, your overall skill level still may be rising, especially in MMA, because people usually start later. Cause they're gaining wisdom, strategy, all of the maybe more tools in their toolbox, right. They're getting all these things. So their actual competitive peak, despite their athletic peak going down, might still be a few years past that, right? Because these things are crossing. No. So I thought I was great. Obviously, the hip was an issue. It's funny because I knew I had a lot of pain here, and I knew it was because of this, and it was like, okay, whenever I'm done, I'll just get it taken care of, whatever. But every time I train, I would have pain kind of, like, all up my back. And the day after the surgery, I woke up and there was no pain on the right side of my surgery. On the left side, there's no pain on the right side of my back. That's fucking weird. Like, every. Every morning I wake up, there's a lot of pain there, you know? Um. Like, okay, well, I'm on pain pills. Maybe it'll. Maybe it'll come back tomorrow. And this. That's never. Never been back since my.
Speaker A: Oh, wow.
Speaker B: So it was weird because it was like this. I thought this was affecting this, but it was affecting all the way across my whole back. So, you know, if I get to get a new hip, honestly, if I. If I. I don't know if it's gonna change the competitive outcome whatsoever. If I had known how good the hip replacement was gonna be, I would have done it. The second I retired from one championship in November of 2017, I would have my hip surgery scheduled for December 1. Just from a lifestyle standpoint. I could only sleep in one position. There was a lot of things I couldn't do. I was in a lot of pain, so I would have done that a lot earlier. But no, from a athletic point, I was ready. This shit goes wrong sometimes.
Speaker A: I don't know how to ask this, but, you know, Joe Rogan Mehden had a sense about you, similar to, like, Fedor, that you are potentially one of the greatest ever.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Does it hurt that you're not in the discussion now of being in the top ten of all time?
Speaker B: I didn't prove it. I don't deserve it.
Speaker A: I mean, but I didn't.
Speaker B: I didn't prove it. I mean, and so it's like, had I. Had I somehow gotten to convince Dana White, we go and convince him in 2013 to make me an offer, and I didn't even need a good offer. I needed any offer. Had I gotten the offer, then maybe the outcome's different. Right? But given I would never expect anyone to think of me that way. I didn't prove it. I know what I was, and I'm good with that. And, yeah, other people never got to see that.
Speaker A: Well, you don't know. You can't know fully. Right. Do you think if you went to the UFC at that time, instead of one championship?
Speaker B: I think I would have a lot of success. Yeah. I mean, there's obviously certain guys, there's a lot of guys I've trained with that I had a lot of really good results against.
Speaker A: And who was Walter Waite at that point?
Speaker B: Tyron was the champion for a long time there, so I was around. Tyron was a champion. Anthony was the champion at lightweight. I was, you know, same gym as him, and we had a lot of people coming through. Yeah.
Speaker A: Would you face Tyron?
Speaker B: Would I have fought him? I don't think so. I mean, so he was still the champion when I came into the UFC and we said, no, we're not gonna fight.
Speaker A: All right.
Speaker B: Hey. So you can't change history, right? So once something happens, you gotta accept for what it is and move forward, and obviously, hope you can continue to keep accomplishing great things, which, for me, obviously, my athletic career's over, so now it's gonna be through my wrestling academies and, you know, who knows what else I get into.
Speaker A: Oh, you might do exhibition matches, all that kind of stuff, right? Statue wrestling and stuff?
Speaker B: No, I don't think so. So here's my thing with the wrestling matches, is, like, just for fun, if you said, hey, Ben, just for fun.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Would you love to go wrestle someone? Yeah, I would. I would. Right? I love. I love wrestling. I get in there. I love, you know, I love, like, so one of my guys has gotten to be pretty good. He's in college, Kegan O'Toole. He just won a junior world title this year. And so when. When I'm doing private lessons, I have such a thing about the development of the athlete. Sometimes I can wrestle hard, but most of the time, it's like, I'm just gonna help them with whatever they need help with. And it's still wrestling and it's fun, but it's helping them, you know, for, like, rake comes back this summer and he's trained for the junior world title. So to be able to just shake hands sometimes and say, like, I'm gonna try to kick your ass. You try to kick my ass? You know, like, just to go, like.
Speaker A: Yeah, it's a good feel.
Speaker B: It's so much fun, and I don't get to do that very much. So if you said, ben, would you love to do some matches? And the answer is, yeah. The problem, unfortunately for me, and maybe you could talk me off a ledge here, is, like, because of where I've gotten to my career. If I choose to do a wrestling match, it's gonna. People are gonna be really excited about it. It's gonna blow up, and it's like, I just want to wrestle. Just to wrestle. I'd rather just, like, go in a room where no one can watch and just wrestle. Just enjoy it.
Speaker A: Well, you could also wrestle. So there's different kinds of wrestling. There's wrestling with this, an event, and, like, you know, there's a build up and an announcement.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: And you can also do, like, khabib style. Like, in the room, there's cameras, and you're kind of going.
Speaker B: It's like, wait, khabib does that?
Speaker A: No, in.
Speaker B: Marcel did that. He whooped my ass a few times.
Speaker A: Yeah, exactly. I mean, I've seen khabib, some videos. It's not, like, set up. It's just people going hard, and then it's more fun.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: You know, and it's. It's also more like presenting the beauty of the sport.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: You know, for sure. And, like. And there's no winning or losing, really, in that context.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Like, you're just. You're always joking around a little bit, even when you go super hard. So I feel like, especially in the modern day, with. With the Internet, that's a compelling way to do.
Speaker B: So I've thought about. This is the one thing I've had thought about doing. Cause I told you about my buddy who has the content thing. It's called Rock Finn. I thought about doing, you know, the old, really famous Gracie challenge.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Okay. So I thought about doing the Askren challenge. You wanna hear my rule set?
Speaker A: Yeah. Let's go.
Speaker B: I'm not sure I'm gonna do this.
Speaker A: People are gonna show up to your, like, in Wisconsin.
Speaker B: I have to select you. I'll start with $1,000. Right. Okay. 30 minutes. You pin me or I pin you. That's it. No points, no nothing. We just wrestle. Camera. That's it. Right. It's camera in the room. Maybe. Maybe there's a referee. Cause we don't want there to be contention over the pin.
Speaker A: So one pin.
Speaker B: Just one pin. 30 minutes. 30 minutes. Okay. If I pin you, you don't get shit, you go home. Right. Every person I pin, it goes up by $1,000. 20, 00, 30, 00, 40, 00, 50, 00, and so on. If you make it the distance and I don't pin you and you don't pin me, I'll pay for your travel and give you $500. Right. Just a consolation prize for showing up if you pin me, you get whatever the jackpot is.
Speaker A: Wait, who's adding to the jackpot?
Speaker B: I am. It's mine. It's my money.
Speaker A: But then what's the incentive to keep winning for you? Because the jackpot, well, because I would.
Speaker B: Put the content somewhere people would watch it.
Speaker A: Oh, so you're gonna make money.
Speaker B: Yeah, so you'd make money.
Speaker A: That way it's not exponentially growing, right. It's just going up by like, yeah.
Speaker B: I really think there's probably only a couple people that could pin me. So I would either just not choose those people or wait till I get a really large audience and people get really excited. In that case, I'm making a lot of money.
Speaker A: So what do you think? How many matches would go with you? Like, Khalid shows up.
Speaker B: I don't think he could pin me. Yeah, so Jordan Burrows. Jordan Burroughs could beat me, but he can't pin me. He was never a pinner. Yeah, he ain't gonna pin me. There's only a few people who have the skill level to do so. Right. It takes a lot. Cause that was so pinning was one of my specialties, I admit, the fourth most of all time. And I won the pinning award the last two years.
Speaker A: So you down on points and just pin them?
Speaker B: This is actually one of the issues I have with jiu jitsu and the point system and the Eddie Bravo thing. I actually think Eddie Bravo things kind of, people get so mad at me. Sorry, jujitsu. I think it's bullshit. And you want me to tell you why it's bullshit?
Speaker A: Yes.
Speaker B: So, like, if Jordan Burroughs whoops my ass and the score is 16 to two, but he can't pin me, then I get to go to overtime and get a cradle on him. I'm probably going to pin him. So I'm better than Jordan Burroughs. Nah, that ain't right. He just whooped my ass. Do you know what I'm saying? Like, if we can go the whole cause they do submission only. So if Jordan Bros. Beats me up for, what's it, eight minutes, ten minutes? I don't know. What's the length of an Eddie Bravo match?
Speaker A: Yeah, I don't know, something like that. Yeah.
Speaker B: So we go ten, me and Joan Burrows, ten minutes. He's going to outscore me significantly. But he will not pin me. I promise you that. Okay, so now we go, we go to the overtime.
Speaker A: Strong words.
Speaker B: But yeah, he won't. Jordan Bros. Is not going to. He's going to beat me. I will give you that.
Speaker A: Kyle Dake won't pin you either.
Speaker B: No.
Speaker A: Okay.
Speaker B: Okay. They will both beat me on points very badly. Now, David Taylor, he might, he might pin me because he's a very good pinner. Also. They'll beat me very badly. They will not pin me. But now we get to overtime and we get to pick like, right. So in a Bravo, you get a rear naked choke or an armbar. Okay, give me a cradle. I'll probably pin them. Okay. A good cradle, you can say cradle or maybe give them. They're not. Probably not going to pin me, right? Maybe, maybe there's a chance, but probably not because that's not their specialty.
Speaker A: So for people who don't know, the Eddie Bravo thing is when it goes into overtime, you get a Dominus position on a person and you get to. Yeah, basically put them in a cradle. This is the wrestling equivalent. Yeah, but you take their back.
Speaker B: Maybe an arm bar. Yeah, wrestling arm bar. And I don't think that's very fair because if someone whoops your ass, they whip your ass and then, you know. And so I think the reason why jujitsu people accept that rule set is that. I don't think, I think they know this, but would admit it. I don't think they're. Their point scoring system at a clue attic adequately rewards what people value. So like in wrestling, we value takedowns cause it gets closer to the pin and the most valuable scoring is a near fault, near to the pin because that's the ultimate goal of the sport. Whereas in jiu jitsu, for example, like if I were to get a taKedown, so like if I went to Gordon Ryan and he just didn't pull guard, I would probably get the takedown. Now if somehow he didn't submit me, which he probably would, right, but say he got, got close to like twelve submissions, but somehow I slipped out of all of them. Now I win 20. Like that's ridiculous. Like he should very clearly win. Cause he almost submitted, you know what I'm saying? Like there. And I, and I realized the difficulty, I realized the difficulty in rewarding near submissions. But that is the most valuable thing is getting close to finishing the match. And in most competitions they don't actually reward that.
Speaker A: But, okay, so this isn't about the sport. This is about the Ben Askren challenge that we're talking about. Okay. Why 30 minutes? Why not unlimited time? Hmm? Why, why go until whenever?
Speaker B: Well, cause then it's just a cardio thing. Cause at some point then someone would just have to fall over dead, right. There's no more skill level involved. It's just. Who can stand up the longest?
Speaker A: You honestly don't think 30 minutes is a cardio thing, too? How do you think that's actually gonna look, kyle, date going against you for 30 minutes?
Speaker B: So it's gonna be kind of boring for the most part.
Speaker A: What position are you going to be?
Speaker B: But you just can't have a gigantic amount of action for 30 minutes. So I relate it, because some of my kids, when teaching them wrestling, they're like, well, but I can't do that for seven minutes. And I'm like, well, you know, say, if I had you do hand cleans at a relatively heavy weight as hard as you could, you're not going to last seven minutes. Your pace will slow down. Right. So my thing is like, well, your pace doesn't have to step here, because in wrestling, you're competing against someone. So if you're here at 100 and you go to 80, but they go to 70, that's great. And now you go to 60, but they go to 40. This is even better. Right? Because the gap is growing. So we don't necessarily. If we get tired, that's fine. If they get more tired, that's better. So I think most people would know that. So they would kind of slow it down. Um, but, yeah, I think in third, I mean, I've wrestled 30 minutes goes. I've wrestled, I've wrestled hour long goes, um, you're not gonna get so tired, you're gonna fall over in that time period. But at some point, if we. If it's unlimited, someone will get so tired that are dehydrated that they're just gonna freaking fall over.
Speaker A: Yeah, but you think, what about making it exciting and dynamic? You think the other person is always going to be going for the pin and thereby make it dynamic.
Speaker B: Well, if they were working that hard, then they might exhaust themselves. Right. And obviously, then if you're. If you're being that dynamic, then you're adding risk to yourself, too, because you are the, you know, doing that.
Speaker A: Well, I love this. This is a great idea.
Speaker B: Well, I figured I'd get. I rack up, like, 20 pins against bums, you know, or not. Not as great people in the beginning. And then I would start bringing in better people. Cause they would be enticed by, you know, $20,000, the possibility to win, and.
Speaker A: Not much fanfare, just a camera and just local.
Speaker B: That's it in my wrestling room.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Like the Gracie challenge.
Speaker B: Yes. Yeah. And so then maybe you have, like, you know, for most people, you have someone edit like the 90 seconds of the most fun things that happen and then you can watch the entire 30 minutes if you want to. Yeah, I mean, I think most people, if they're not really, really elite, I'm probably going to pin them if they're not really elite. So. Yeah, but I don't know, that's something I've been thinking about. This has been like fun for me to think about. Obviously it plays to my skill sets because my cardio is good and I, my pinning is good also.
Speaker A: So, yeah, so like you said, you weren't very good in your early days until 1314. What was the switch you became? You started to dominate people in your college career. You dominated and obviously you stopped losing at some point.
Speaker B: Yeah, so. Well, I would say so even when I didn't lose in collegiate competition, I would go in the summers and try to make the world team. So I would have lose some, not a lot, right? Minimally. Okay, so when I'm five, I start playing all sports. Like, I know you moved to America at what age?
Speaker A: 13.
Speaker B: Okay, so five. So at least, I don't know what it was for you, but in America at my age, you usually played like a sport every season, right? So that's what I did. In the beginning, I had minimal success in wrestling. I was kind of chunky. And then now in fifth grade, I cant tell you I want to be better. And I told my parents, and this is funny because now I look at other eleven year olds and very few of them are this mature. And I actually think emotional maturity is kind of one of the key indicators of how long term successful someones going to be. And at age eleven I said I dont want to play baseball. I like baseball, but I dont want to play baseball because I want to wrestle more because I want to get better at wrestling. So age eleven, I quit baseball so I could wrestle in a club for March, April and may because that was all that existed at that point in time. You couldn't wrestle in June, July or August, any of those other months.
Speaker A: What was that desire to get better? What is it? So it's not about, I don't know.
Speaker B: Where it came from. I just want to get better. I want to get better. I want to be good at this. I want to be really good at this.
Speaker A: So when you're looking at kids now as a coach, you're looking for that somebody who says, you know what, I kind of suck.
Speaker B: I want to get better and I want to try to also inspire that. I mean, honestly, I think as a coach, that's probably my. My biggest job is to get a kid and get them to believe I can do this. Cause if I can do this, what can. I can do that, I can do that too. Right? And there's so many kids who unfortunately have, like, shitty parents or bad teachers that tell them, you suck. You can't be anything, right? So I think my biggest goal as a coach is to get someone to believe they can do it. So, actually, some of the ones that believe they can do it, they're the most fun, but they're not the ones who need it the most, right? The ones who think they can are the ones that need me the most. I need someone to. Let's go. Um, so I don't. I don't know what inspired me. I'm not sure. So age. At age eleven, fifth grade, I quit. I start. So then I started having more success. You know what I'm like, say, placing at the state tournament, um, in high school. Uh, so you. You write fifth. So 6th grade, I placed it, like, the state local u state tournament, you know, so I'm like, having more success. 7th grade was the first year I won the youth state tournament. Um, so I'm getting better. 8th grade, I actually feel like I got pretty good, but, like, when I went to the national tournaments, I was still having really minimal success. My freshman year, I decided to quit football. Same reason. It's like, well, I need to put more time into this. My parents, we got. My dad, luckily got a mat in my basement. So, you know, there's no. So we have a year round club, and our impetus was that we didn't have this opportunity to go to a club year round. So we had a mat in my basement, had to go find. Hey, you want to come wrestle? Yeah. To find partners for myself.
Speaker A: What'd you do? Did you drill? Did you live wrestle? What'd you do in that basement?
Speaker B: So, actually, I think you'll enjoy this. I think the start of my scrambling was, was kind of based around that. So I got kind of. I think it's probably my freshman, sophomore. I'm kind of. The years are a little fuzzy, right. It's been a while, but probably my freshman, sophomore, junior year, I found two kids who were really consistent, who would come out like, you'd come out on. He'd come out on Tuesday and this dude come out on a Wednesday. Right. And they would come every week and they were really consistent partners for me to have in the summer, but they weren't nearly as good as me, they were way worse. So it's like, okay, how do I make this kind of, like, fun and compelling for them to come back? If I whip their ass, they're not gonna come back, you know? So it's like, I would let them get as close as they could as I thought they could do a takedown before not getting it and then try to, like, escape or get out. So, obviously, if I let them get really close, sometimes they get it, you know, so they're. They're enjoying it. I don't know if they ever knew I was doing this, right? I have no idea. And that was kind of like the start. Cause I. I had to figure my way out of bad positions because I had to try to make it entertaining for them where they still got something out of it and they wanted to come back the next week, and I also got something out of it.
Speaker A: Yeah. I love this because that relationship is so important with that like that, I've had a few drilling partners, training partners that were really important to my life, and I always wonder why it's difficult, why it's so difficult to find them.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Like, I. If anyone's listening to this, I'm looking for a judo person in the Austin area. Actually, getting the reps with people is hard, even in jiu jitsu, that it's just like, people want to do the fun stuff. They don't want to really put in the work, and it takes a certain kind of personality, and then you also have to make it fun for the other person. Just like you said, if there's a skill mismatch, but also if you have an interest mismatch in terms of the. The amount of drilling you want to do, all that kind of stuff, you have to figure out ways to make it fun. Yeah, it's tricky. So you did.
Speaker B: So I. Yeah, I think I did that, and no one told me. That's why I get some. I get frustrated because now we have, you know, just in my academy, we probably have 50, 60 high school kids only that are year round, that they're year round. You know, maybe they're not as consistent in the summer or whatever, but they're there. So when they don't have a great partner, they start whining. It's like you little bitches. Like, you know, I. Some days I get really mad about it because it's like I had no partners. I had to find freaking. Two partners come twice a week, you guys, there's still 22 people in the room. I'm sorry. There's not the perfect partner for you, but, like, go work out with that dude.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: You know? Yeah.
Speaker A: So what was the switch that changed? Or was this gradual or gradual?
Speaker B: Okay, yeah. So let's do. So. 9th grade, I quit football. Cause I wanna get really serious.
Speaker A: What position? Footplate.
Speaker B: I was actually nose tackle. And I was. But at that point, so, okay, so I was also. The other thing I kind of left over is I was really fat growing up in 6th grade. I also decided, okay, I'm really fat. And if I want to be competitive wrestling, I shouldn't be fat because weight matters. I went from 130 pounds to 100 pounds in 6th grade. So by the time I was a freshman, I was 119. So I had. I still wasn't as heavy as I was on 6th grade, so I was pretty small, too. But I was also slow, unfortunately. So they put me in nose tackle. I like the compatibleness, so I was decent at it.
Speaker A: So that's where you wrestle 119 my freshman year.
Speaker B: Yeah. So, yeah, so then I still. I started having a lot of success state wise, but not nationally. It's my national success. Didn't come to, like, my junior year in high school, but, yeah, I was, like, grinding and getting better the whole time. And then senior year, I started having a lot of success nationally, and I got recruited. And then. But then even when my freshman year of college, I. This is where I love competing. I would go every weekend because I knew if you take the emotions out of competition, all it is is seeing your failures, acknowledging them, and then figuring out what you need to work on. Right. If we take all the emotion out of it, that's what it is. So I wrestled 50 matches as a red shirt freshman, which is incredibly rare. I had ten losses. So it's not like. And like to not. Not so great guys, you know? So, like, my skill level still at that point was not that great. And then the next year, I came out and I made the NCAA finals. So my, my. I made a gigantic jump in that red shirt year to the. To the real freshman year.
Speaker A: So, a few questions. Yeah. Where did the funk style wrestling, the creative stuff get developed? At which stage?
Speaker B: So I. So I think, like, looking retroactively. There was no. There was no intention to start when I was in high school with those kids. But I think that's kind of, like, what was happening, right? So what I would really say is I had one influential coach, my retro year of college named Mike Ironman. Great guy. But then the second thing was, it was just out of necessity. I had this burning desire to be the best. And when I was getting my ass kicked every day in the room. Cause we had, you know, Tyrone was there. We had all american 157. We had all american 184. So I wasn't having a ton of success. And very quickly I realized from, like, a more traditional athletic perspective, strength and speed, I couldn't keep up with anyone. I was way worse. So it's like, okay, fuck, how do I. How do I do this? You know, I want to do this. How do I do this? There's got to be a way, you know? So Mike Ireman showed me a couple things, but then it was just like, this creative expansion for the next, say, three to five years. And then even now, it's like, I don't know, there's something. And maybe you feel this way about judo or there's something that's, like, fun about the way the body moves and works and exploring something new and thinking about, hey, wrestling's been happening at a relatively high level for, we'll say, 80 to 90 years in America, and there's still new things being developed. And so when you see something new, you're like, damn. Like, that's great. Or, like, Jason know if may have to win Dixie. I'm like, how did I not think of that shit? Like, why did I think of that so easy? I should. I should have thought of that. You know? So there's this, like, obsession with the sport of wrestling and, you know, positions where I actually think sometimes think I wouldn't have smartphones because I may have been distracted by my smartphone. Maybe I wouldn't have been. Cause I was so obsessed, but maybe. But, you know, some days I had couldn't finish the single leg on this specific person. Or maybe they were finishing on me and they go home and I just fucking obsess about that one position. Like, okay, what am I missing here? And not just accepting like that. Whatever the coach says is the answer, but, like, what am I missing? What ways can my body move that no one's told me it can move yet? Where can my arms go, right? Where can I do all these things? And so I would just obsess about these things. And then, you know, sometimes you come in the next day and you say, oh, well, maybe this, you know, and maybe it works. Maybe it doesn't. Maybe it works twice, and then it doesn't work the next time. And so you kind of, like, have this creative process, and it's like, you know, there's a lot of things that are on the cutting room floor that never made it to the light because you thought they'd be good and they failed and they sucked. And then, you know, to the point where, like, my senior year, I got to this point where the people then they were just figures. Figures would wrestle in my head about positions I was thinking about. I wouldn't tell them what to do. They would just, they go in my head and then like some. Oh, fuck, wait, that's it. That, that's it. That just happened. That's the move. And then I go try to practice. And sure enough, boom. That's the move.
Speaker A: That's exactly where you have alpha zero playing, learning chess. You have. Oh, no, it's called self plays. You have. What did the figures have?
Speaker B: Like, no faces? They were just like, did they have.
Speaker A: A human form or is it just like stick figures, essentially?
Speaker B: There was not like. Yeah, it was like humans. It was more like stick figures. Wouldn't stick figures exactly like they were.
Speaker A: That's some volume.
Speaker B: Yeah, it was like, it was like a great person. And they had, you know, three dimensions, essentially, because I had to see how the things moved and. Yeah.
Speaker A: I mean, this is exactly what OpenAI and DeepMind at Google are. I don't know if you've seen, but there's something called reinforcement learning in artificial intelligence where you have, like, they've done it for, like, sumo wrestling. You have. You have, like, you have these two stick figures that don't even know how to get up at first, and they figure out how to stand their 2ft, and then they figure out how to push the other person off of the pedestal.
Speaker B: Wait, so. But what about, like, when you look at the Boston dynamics, sometimes they have trouble with, like, jumping and balancing into other stuff. So are they, are they doing that same program or. No, no, no.
Speaker A: This. Everything Boston dynamics is doing is hard coded, so it's not, it's not learning the. All the sophisticated movements and strategies, like, high level strategies and movement, that's all something that Boston dynamics does not do. And if it does, it, like, the parkour stuff, that's all hard coded in.
Speaker B: Oh.
Speaker A: People, like, project and think, like, these robots have, like, discovered, like, how to move in sophisticated ways. They haven't.
Speaker B: Well, that's what, when you and John were talking about the grappling robot.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: I mean, the one thing I was obsessing about in my head is that with the chest, right. If a chest piece moves, right, the horse can move like an l. It can only move like an l. It doesn't matter if it moves at 2 meters/second or 7 meters/second it can only move there, right? Whereas, like a single leg, I can shoot a single leg with many different velocities. I can shoot at different angles. I can shoot with different amounts of force, right. I can shoot with my head up versus my head. I mean, right? All these things are going to matter. If we're talking about a human being defending the single leg, all of those things are going to matter. And that's where human beings who wrestle are calculating those things subconsciously. They're obviously not consciously calculating in their head. Oh, the force is coming at me at this. So I need to do that doing it.
Speaker A: But see, the thing is. So you would. Absolutely. If you're doing a robot that you're wrestling, you're going to have to constrain the speed at which it moves and the power that it's able to deliver, so that presumably there'll be the limitations. So then it'll be just the same exact way as a human.
Speaker B: But then, but even so, if we go human, max force. Jordan Burrows, double max force, right? That's the highest, that's highest we get. And then we go down from there. Even within that, it's like sometimes I can shoot a single egg with a maximum force of, we'll say 20. This is a number, right? I don't always shoot it at 20 because I feel. Sometimes I shoot at 15, sometimes I shoot at twelve. Right. Cause you feel something in your opponent that makes you do it differently. So they would have to learn how and then all these different things. And sometimes maybe I clamp a little harder. So the robot would have to learn all these different incoming inputs to the system and then create this reaction.
Speaker A: Oh, no, no, 100%. So this would be all continuous, like. So unlike chess, it would not. It's just, chess is discrete.
Speaker B: There's, it's one.
Speaker A: And you move, it's a very specific set of moves. Now, here you would. Those are all variables you control, and they're continuous variables. So the speed, the force, there's actuators. So there's all these joints, right? Yeah, you can move. I mean, it's just an optimization problem.
Speaker B: It's kind of fat. It was fascinating. So I've been fascinated thinking about it since you guys talked about it. It was a long time ago. I listened to it probably three to four weeks ago, and I've kind of been, like, obsessing about it ever since.
Speaker A: Yeah, it just changes when. So unlike boxing, for example, or striking, you know, once you grab ahold of somebody, it changed. You're now, one body. Right. So it's very complicated. It's not just shooting a double leg without, like, maybe doing, like. Like faking a double leg and then shooting the double leg. That's very doable with robotics, but then, like, doing a clinch and from there, doing, like, a russian tie like that. Yeah, that's. I think that's way harder than people realize in terms of how many things are involved, like the force of the grip, the leverage you're providing with all the different parts of the shoulder and the arm and the torso, the twist. How much of your weight are you allocating? Like, leaning on the other person, like, taking weight off of one of your legs and the other leg, all of that. I think that's the really interesting thing about humans, is we're able to do all of this calculation subconsciously. Yeah. Subconsciously.
Speaker B: Yeah. And that's what I've been thinking about since we. It's like how many things, even these high school athletes who are, like, getting medium good are subconsciously thinking about all the time, or not even. Not even thinking about. Sorry. Reacting to. But then even, like, for me, I'm, you know, I'm a few orders of meg do better than some of these kids I play. And so when I. When I go, like, super hard, it's like I can feel their weight moving the wrong direction. And so for me to off balance them or trip them or whatever is kind of easy sometimes, you know, because they're not feeling it the right way. Right. Or their timing's just a little bit off or the way they're grabbing the hip, maybe they should be up a little higher. Right. These really small things.
Speaker A: Yeah. I think that's all easy to take advantage of for a robot. It's just there's so many things. The. The big problem is ethically. I don't know how many people are willing to train with a robot because you're gonna get hurt.
Speaker B: Well, couldn't you make a robot train with a robot or no.
Speaker A: Yes, but then it's expensive, so.
Speaker B: Because they're gonna put the padding on that thing.
Speaker A: I know, but then it's not. You know, it then you're not capturing the full.
Speaker B: Why can't you put, like, some rubber coating on them? You know, something to that effect?
Speaker A: You could. I mean, you could.
Speaker B: Yeah, you could.
Speaker A: I mean, you're talking about robots that are. These are humanoid robots, so we're talking about 500,000 million dollar robots. So you would have to be motivated.
Speaker B: Spend a lot of money.
Speaker A: To spend a lot of money. Because you have to have them wrestle for, like, a lot to get better, yet to get better. And then the open question is, how long does it take to get good enough to be a human? I don't think we understand. I don't think you understand how hard wrestling is. Yeah, like, is it a really hard problem? Like, what's harder, chess or wrestling?
Speaker B: Wrestling, by far. Name. Close.
Speaker A: That's. Yeah, that's the sense.
Speaker B: So there's an infinite amount of moves, right. And possibilities. So once I shoot the single leg, now you have x amount of choices. Once you make your choice. Now I have a choice. X amount of choices. Now I. Now you have x amount of choices on the defense. And we can just keep going back and forth. Right. And this number becomes.
Speaker A: Yeah, but the same happens with chess.
Speaker B: Correct. But then in wrestling, you have to make these movements very instantaneously. Right. Cause if I should sing, like, I'm not gonna wait and say, what's your defense?
Speaker A: Yeah. Right.
Speaker B: You have to be instantaneously. And then also, again, based on the force and the vectors and the angles, you have to calculate that and adjust. So really, you know, if you're saying, why can't you. A single leg, it's not like moving the chest. It's not one move. Right. It's. If you wanna talk about different forces and stuff, it could be hundreds or thousands of different moves based on how hard I shoot it, the angle, the direction, all of those things.
Speaker A: Yeah, but wait a minute. So robots can do this kind of stuff really fast? People probably know the physiology of this, but it's the. The reaction speed for a human is maybe 100 milliseconds, something like that. I don't know, from sensation to, like, from the signal traveling up your brain and down. I don't know what that number is. But a robots certainly could do way faster. It. You would actually have to, like, constraint the speed.
Speaker B: Well, so the robots are already killing the chess people. Yes. So, yeah, theoretically, they could eventually be wrestlers. But you asked what was hard, wrestling or chess?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: I think wrestling is because of the time component in it and then the end and the physicality of, you know, is it this force or that force? You know, because if I'm gonna say. Say we're in a seatbelt side by side. Right. A wrestling seatbelt, not based on the pressure you're giving me. I might do a bunch of things, right. And so, like, to an untrained eye, they might both look like the same thing from you to a trained feel, it's like, well, in one case, it's really evident I should go this way. In other cases, real evident, I should go that way.
Speaker A: So the other thing to consider, just like with chess, the AI systems, so human versus human play a certain way together. They actually haven't considered a really large number of strategies that AI systems discover. So one possibility, with a robot, they'll discover certain ties and certain takedowns. I'm saying that, like, will dominate no matter what the human does.
Speaker B: You think that? So you think there's that. So this, I mean, this, I talk about the wrestling. So fun is there's even after 80, 90 years, there's this continuous evolution.
Speaker A: Yeah. So you'll be some, like, low single type thing, like John Smith type of situation.
Speaker B: Well, like a down block, go behind is something that has really, I would say really in the last five ish years has really been evolved. What's the go behind, down block, go behind. So when you head inside or head outside matters, but there's one for both, you shoot at me, essentially, I take my leg. Boom. And then, so that was kind of in existence when I was in college. Right. You down block them and you stop. But usually you hit on this side of their head. Right. And now immediately as you shoot, I attack that shoulder, and then I start hitting a go behind on you. Right. And so, like that, in its current incarnation, it absolutely wasn't wrong. When I was in college, I would say it probably became popular five to seven years ago. So, yeah, there's these big things that are happening now. I really want to robot because I want to be ahead of the game. I want to know what I'm missing.
Speaker A: I mean, one interesting thing you have with Alphazero that plays chess is it sacrifices pieces much more than humans do. So give you a piece, and not only does it give you a piece, it will wait a bunch of moves before it makes you pay because it.
Speaker B: Knows that that's better for the long term.
Speaker A: Long term. So, like, humans rarely sacrifice without getting the piece back. Like two or three moves after Alphazero can wait, like five moves. So. So basically you'll have potentially with wrestling, you might have a robot that, like, puts itself in bad positions, but in a certain kind of way that will.
Speaker B: Actually lures the opponent in to trap.
Speaker A: Exactly.
Speaker B: That's what my style is based on.
Speaker A: Well, you basically narrow, one thing to do is you narrow the set of choices. You put yourself in a bad position, but it narrows a set of choices.
Speaker B: For them because they're not used to it.
Speaker A: Yeah, they're not used to it, and. And then you. You drag them into, uh, into your. Yeah, so. But there's also. The problem is there's mechanical issues. Like, it's actually just difficult to build robots that are able to sense because we have sensation throughout our body. Yeah. It's just difficult to build that kind of robot. It's expensive. You start talking about multi, multi million dollars, and then people start asking questions, why did you invest all of this money?
Speaker B: I want to see what moves I do. Hello.
Speaker A: It could be better investment.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: So I mentioned John Smith. He is, if people don't know, one of the great wrestlers, wrestling coaches ever. He's also creative, like you. He spoke really highly of you. What do you think about that guy? Did you guys ever work together?
Speaker B: Not really. So you know what? When I was a senior and I had the people wrestling in my head, I was lucky enough to be doing, I was pretty much graduated. So I did an independent study with the sports psychology. I was potentially going to grad school for sports psych. Well, I actually did nine credits, and then I decided I don't want to do it anymore. I continue learning on my own. But I had an independent study with the guy who's the head of USA track and field support psych. So I guess. So here was the class was, I got to go sit down and talk with him for an hour. And he was, like, fascinated by me. So he didn't really make me do homework. It was like the greatest three credits ever. We just talked. I learned so much. It was so awesome. So one time it came up, I had these robot people wrestling in my head. And he said, well, who else do you think? I bet John Smith happened. So I went and got John Smith's number. I called him and said, hey, you ever had these people wrestling in your head? And he said, yeah, but as soon as I stopped coaching, they went away. Same thing happened to me. Soon they started coaching, they went away. So if I really force myself now, and I'm like, I see some in practice, and it's really higher level because high school wrestling, I don't want to, maybe I feel bad, but it's a little bit lower level. So if, like Keegan, for example, who won the journey, if he's struggling with a problem or ask me a question and I can force myself to see the bodies moving and think about it again, kind of like I was in the early age, but it won't just flow there anymore. So he said it went away. And for me, it went away also.
Speaker A: By the way, if you can pause on the. On the bodies in your head?
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: What, like, how are they generating new ideas? Are they just kind of.
Speaker B: I don't know. You tell me.
Speaker A: So it's just. They're just, like, rambling in your head?
Speaker B: It would be specifically based on a problem I was struggling with or a specific position. You know, kind of.
Speaker A: It goes in for single. And then. And then go from there.
Speaker B: Yeah. So, like, I'm sitting in geography class and, you know, have to work that hard because it's easy. Right. And, yeah, I'm just sitting there, like, kind of acting like I'm looking at the board and these guys are wrestling, and I'm watching them wrestle. And, yeah, sometimes they come up with a really good solution.
Speaker A: Is there somebody you looked up to style wise? Gable. John Smith.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: All these, like, legend status people.
Speaker B: Probably gable or gable. John Smith after the fact. So the problem with wrestling in my era was you couldn't watch it. There was no. There's no access. Right. It wasn't. It wasn't really available. Even if you want to say, go find a bunch of John Smith, Matt. They're kind of hard to find. Right. There's a couple of them on YouTube, but I've obviously seen all of those. But in. In my era, there was. There really wasn't any of it. So it was hard to be a fan of something. And that's what wrestling. Wrestling has his. The fans are going like this because now, you know, you flip on the flow app and you can watch, you know, something that's happening in Europe. Right. We can do this easily so we can be a fan of people. So now I'm more a fan of wrestling than I was then because there just was no access. So now I can watch someone I like and say, oh, shit, like, that guy's wrestling. Oh, boom. I flipped my phone on. I watched them wrestle, you know, that.
Speaker A: Type of thing, you know, on a quick rant. It's really frustrating that you can't watch the Olympics.
Speaker B: Oh, my God, it's so frustrating.
Speaker A: I've been. I think I'm gonna go to war on.
Speaker B: Go to NBC's headquarters. I'll go with you. You got a soldier here.
Speaker A: I was talking to Jimmy. Jimmy Pedro. He was surprised by this, too. Most matches, you can't see, even you talk about, like, comeback, gable, Steelson. You can't see the full match. You get, like, a crappy highlight.
Speaker B: So the two. The two biggest things in rat and really the three, the NCAA championships on ESPN, the Olympic trials are on NBC, and the Olympics are NBC. And these things. These companies are so big, they don't have a department dedicated to selling the rights to that footage. Right. So the rights to wrestling footage, which no one really cares all that much about except a niche, are the exact same as track and field or basketball and Olympics. So, yes, all of this stuff is completely inaccessible to us. The NCAA, the Olympic trials. In the Olympics. You can't go watch old film on it. It sucks.
Speaker A: Yeah, older current film. Yeah.
Speaker B: So you came and watch the gable match?
Speaker A: The gable seals. No, they did a. You know, they do something that annoys the fuck out of me.
Speaker B: What?
Speaker A: Okay. They. They. They do, like a three or two minute highlight. So it's like they capture the most important thing, but, like, it's all about the buildup.
Speaker B: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker A: It's like that very beginning when you step on the mat and the nerves and you walk out and like that. I mean, I don't know, you miss.
Speaker B: Then.
Speaker A: Then when the triumph happens or the heartbreak happens, it has that much more power.
Speaker B: Yeah. If you want to go to war with NBC or ESPN, I'm happy to join that.
Speaker A: IOC.
Speaker B: Well, I mean, does the IOC.
Speaker A: IOC is selling for the Olympics, is the one that's making.
Speaker B: Well, so NBC broadcast. So they obviously have the live rights. You would think they would have recorded if they. I mean, they're the ones recording it. You would think they keep the rights when you think.
Speaker A: No, no, I. Their lice getting a license of it. They're getting exclusive, like, license. But, like the. You know, for example, I've had this. I talked to Travis Stevens, the judo player, and there's a really sort of famous match. It's a heartbreak in his career from 2012 Olympics where he goes against the german Ole Bischoff, whatever. It's a 20 minutes match to go to war, and that's not available anywhere. But it's uploaded on YouTube and set to private. The reason I know this is on the IOC channel. So they've uploaded all of these matches.
Speaker B: They haven't been put up. So actually. So my Olympic match, the one I won, got put public, and I don't know if it was private. It got put up on YouTube. I was alerted to it the week of my Jake Paul fight. It was so dumb. I'm like, why the. This is epic. 13 years later, this is bullshit. Like, this should have been up. So, I mean. Okay, so what about Olympic trials footage? That has to be the USOC, then, or NBC. So I know, like, okay, so I know flow, right? Cause I work for them. I know, if flow buys your event or whatever. Right? They buy the rights generally in the contract, they'll have rights to both live stream it and then use that footage at any point moving forward. Those matches live on Flo's website. That's why I would be surprised if NBC didn't have something similar.
Speaker A: Flow does a pretty good job of providing, like, a place where you can watch all these matches. NBC does not.
Speaker B: Does not.
Speaker A: Yeah, and also, there's an argument with flow as well, but certainly with olympics, there's a difference between what flow does and what the Olympics represent.
Speaker B: What do you mean by that?
Speaker A: Like, it feels like the Olympics, which is what the charter says should be as accessible as possible. Yes, like. Like you should really lower the barrier for entry for the olympics.
Speaker B: You know, that's what the charter says. But those people in the IOC, those are the worst people ever. Yeah, they're very bad.
Speaker A: Well, they're not. They're not bad. They just lost touch of the dream they once had when they joined the IOC.
Speaker B: Well, I would argue. I would argue all the way back that these are rich, fat cats who, like, I get so mad about the NCAA, which finally now got rid of this bullshit term amateurism. It's like where there's some holy grail where you can't make money to be an amateur athlete, but the people who own the IOC are the people who own the institutions, college institutions are making boatloads of money off of you. That's crap.
Speaker A: So you competed, like you said, at the 2008 Olympics. Did you believe you can win gold?
Speaker B: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker A: So your mental game was on point?
Speaker B: Yeah, I was ready.
Speaker A: So what. What went wrong?
Speaker B: This wasn't good enough? That was what I said. Yeah, yeah. I mean, so at that point in time, I. It was my first year of international competition. So when I came out in 2007 is my first time making 74 kg, which is pretty small for me. I had some failures, but then quickly I turned that around and I was having success in America. I was beating everyone. I don't say easy, but I. Yeah, you know, I was doing really well. I went international one time and there was one match I got cheated on. The Russians. They're cheaters. Excuse Ukraine, not Russia. I lost. R1 match where I actually lost, and it was to Dennis sarguch, who would go on to win three world titles. But he was behind the t of that year and it was competitive, so I knew, ok, I'm going with the best guys in the world. I beat a bunch of other guys who, you know, were. Were good had had past decent results, so I knew I was, like, right there. Unfortunately, I ran this guy, ivan Fundora, and I had someone do scouting reports for him, actually, my high school coaches for our academy, John messenbrank. And Fundor was the worst stylistic matchup. I got him and I lost him second round. So I wasn't good enough. Had I decided to keep wrestling, I probably would have gotten better. But at that point in time, this wasn't in the cards.
Speaker A: So in your division was like you said, satyaev, satyaev. That guy is special.
Speaker B: He's very special. So that would be my other guy that you asked earlier who I enjoyed watching, and that was a guy. It was kind of after the fact because it was hard to access footage. But he was a lot of fun to watch.
Speaker A: What do you think made him great? A lot of people talk about him as potentially one of the greatest ever.
Speaker B: Absolutely. I mean, six. And so he won six and three. Six worlds, nine. Six worlds, three olympics, nine total, which, there's only one or two people above that. So again, it was, it was hard to watch any live footage of him, but from what I've seen, his feel is different. He was just ahead of his time and the feel and the touch he had for certain moves and different things because obviously, physically, he's kind of unimposing. He's taller and skinnier, which is, it can work in wrestling, but is by less represented. Yeah, he was special.
Speaker A: So.
Speaker B: Good.
Speaker A: Do you take any inspiration from, let's talk about Dagestan in general. What do you think makes those wrestlers great?
Speaker B: Yeah, it's fascinating. Have you read the book the talent code? Yeah, it's great. And that kind of talks about these talent hotspots all around the world. And so now, obviously, with our wrestling academies, we try to take a, some lessons from that and apply it. I got to assume they didn't cover Dagestan in that book specifically, but I got to assume a lot of the same principles that are in that book apply to Dagestan and wrestling. They did South Korea and women's golf. They did Curacao and baseball. They picked a lot of these other places that were really elite. I think it was maybe Moscow and women's tennis also. I think all these things that make any group great organization is probably the.
Speaker A: Same things that's happening there with the hardship. I mean, what, is there something specific about wrestling that can create so many great champions from that area?
Speaker B: So obviously, they're all, they all love it. Like, it's a big deal that wrestling is specifically is a big deal there. You know, they do sambo also, obviously. So that's part of it is a lot of the kids are doing it. They obviously are rough tumble, tough life.
Speaker A: Getting a lot of fights.
Speaker B: And then I think that also that a lot of them. It is a way out, right? The elite level athletes in that part of the world, from my understanding, are really well compensated compared to what the average person makes, and they're treated really well. So people see it as a way out, whereas, like. And then, honestly, if America's getting better. But in 2008, the reason I went to MMA was because I didn't want to be poor my whole life. You know what I'm saying? It sucks. It's like, well, I don't want to make $20,000 for the next 48 years, so I'm gonna go do something else. If I could have made even, and I need to be rich, right? If I could have made $100,000 or $70,000 wrestling, I probably would've kept wrestling. So I think. I think it's this factors, and obviously, now they have a really, like, a bunch of really good people in one area, so there's probably. And it's been going on for a long time, so it's probably a bunch of, like, adults and coaches that are coming back and helping that progress. So, yeah, a lot of those things that happen.
Speaker A: So I'm definitely going to travel there as I talk to him, because I can speak Russian. It makes. It makes it very. Makes me uniquely qualified to.
Speaker B: My brother can speak a little bit of Russian.
Speaker A: Your brother can?
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Okay. Like, a little bit. Like two squares and.
Speaker B: No, no. Like, he would. Oh, man. Don't make me overstep. I think he would be able to have a conversation with you, I think. Okay, probably not like you.
Speaker A: What's the. What's the reason he knows Russia.
Speaker B: I don't know why he got obsessed with languages. And so his college degree is actually, what do they call interdisc, where you have three minors. So he had a minor in Russian, a minor in Spanish, and maybe Japanese. I'm messing up. It's definitely Russian. And Spanish are for sure. I don't know what the third one is. No, but, yeah, Dagestan. It's really fascinating.
Speaker A: But the emphasis on technique, the lighter drilling, like, they don't really go super hard.
Speaker B: Yeah. And I only spent a couple, so I was there. I was in Vladi Kavkaz in 2008. That was where the world cup was. We had to train there. For, like, two days afterwards. So I didn't get to dig deep, did dig deep into what was going on or anything, but, yeah, I mean, I think sparring has. Sparring is very beneficial for wrestling. Not like sparring. Mma is. We fight. Right. Sparring in wrestling is. So I always just describe it to be really simple. If we're drilling, it's relatively 0% resistance. If we're going as hard as we can, that's 100%. There's all this gray area in the middle that's sparring. Right. And so, you know, if you have a good relationship, like, you know, college, me and my brother, we could just go and we know where each other's at. We don't have to talk about it. Right. But, like, in my wrestling club, we'll say, okay, hey, I want you guys to go 50% in this position, or I want the high crotch guy. I want him to shoot, and this is for him. So I want him to go 70. And defensive guy, I want you to go 40. So you're not, you're not supposed to be trying to win here. You're going to go a little later. I want you to give him some looks, you know? So I think. I think he has really taken hold in America. I think it's really beneficial for success, and I think that's. I mean, America's doing better than we've ever done historically.
Speaker A: Well, that's 70 and 40. That's like an art form to find that right place, because, like, what the really good people I've trained with, they go much closer to 100% speed wise, or, like. But without, like, forcing things. Yeah, you would. When you're going, it's some weird combination of things that, like, if you truly earn a technique, then you're given that technique. Yeah, but, like, if you don't, you don't. Yeah. And then it becomes much less injury prone. It becomes somehow more fun, more dynamic. You don't get stuck in positions. It's just a lot of movement. Yeah.
Speaker B: The one thing so you and John talked about, you know, like, different ways to learn and get better. And so I think Jon obviously innovated within the sport of jiu jitsu, and so for us, one of the, and maybe there's a differentiator for us, I think about it.
Speaker A: Sorry to interrupt. You have this academy, and you sent me this plan that you have a really well thought through plan for how to develop a good wrestler.
Speaker B: So, but, so I think it's, for me, there's four categories. Right. There's the teaching, which is like, you don't know shit. You're coming in and I'm showing you the move, and you're literally going out there and you're trying to. Me, that's not even drilling. That's like teaching. Like, you're trying to learn something. So obviously, in someone's earlier periods, they're spending a lot of time in that phase because they literally don't even know how to move their bodies the right way. Once you learn the skill, then there's the drilling, because you need to. You absolutely have to get those reps to become really proficient in that movement. And then the sparring, and then the live. Right? And so, like, I think obviously, by the time you get to the kind of endpoint. Right. But further on, the time you spend teaching is so. I don't want to say I'm sorry, in the learning teaching phase is not insignificant, but so much smaller, because to someone who's really good, who I've coached for ten years, I don't have to give this big, long, drawn out explanation. I just have to say, hey, move your hand a little differently, or just do this. We don't have to spend any time there. So I think that's something that consumes for the younger kids, say, five through twelve or 13. We're consuming a massive amount of time there on that teaching learning phase. And then as we get older, that time wanes a lot.
Speaker A: But that makes total sense, right?
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: It's funny. Cause when you look at, like, jiu jitsu schools, they spend a lot of time in the teaching learning, and then the live feels like there's not enough drilling. I like how you draw a distinction there.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Because it feels like you're always starting from scratch. Like, people have, like, very crappy short term memory. Like, they're not. Like, the way teaching is done is you show a technique from scratch, and it seems disjoint.
Speaker B: It is, for sure. Especially if you have a class that's been with you for a while. You don't have to start from scratch. You can say, hey, let's focus on this one little thing here, or after we do this, let's do that. And you kind of start putting it all together. And then with Jiu Jitsu, the thing that I really struggled with was a couple things. And this is not speaking for all the Jiu jitsu, my personal experience through the sport. And I actually found, when I unretired, I found someone really great that I loved. And I really wish it was Mark Lehman. I don't know if you know him at all. I wish I would have found him earlier. Cause he was just tremendous. But number one, there's no drilling. So it's like in wrestling, I can boil down to. I can probably name you the best six moves, right? So we need, as younger people, single leg, right? Single legs. Gonna be the most proficient takedown. It always has been. I don't know. Probably always will be. Unless they figures out something different.
Speaker A: The robot.
Speaker B: The robot. We're gonna shoot a lot of single legs. Why? Because we're. Cause everyone's gonna do that, right? We're gonna shoot a lot of single legs. So just like, say, an arm bar or some type of sweep, right? Why can't we go get 50 reps there? Hey, we. I mean, by the time I've been in your jiu jitsu school for two years, I better know. Fucking armbar. I better know what. So don't. Don't spend ten minutes teaching me. Just tell me to go hit 50 reps. And then if one. I'm hitting my reps. If there's something I'm doing wrong, then just say, hey, Ben, move your leg a little bit that way or raise your hips up a little more. Right? Like, correct as you're drilling. So you're getting all these reps at it, so you're becoming more proficient. And then the other thing I really struggle with was, to your point, during live, so many times, it's just this five minute go. Go. And that's not the most efficient way to learn, because when you have two people, especially when they're focused on winning, and you say go, they're going to go to whatever they do best. Well, if I'm trying to make you good at something, I don't want you doing what you do best all the time. I need you doing some other things. Right. If you have a great single leg, but you can't shoot to the other side of their body, well, we need to work on that, right? You need to start shooting the other side.
Speaker A: There's some sense, though, you. It's not like you should be told what to work on, but you should be told to work on the thing that you want to work on. Meaning. Because I don't know about. Maybe you can comment on this, but, you know, everybody develops a different game as you get better and better. There's a set of things you need to be working on. So I actually have, like, when I. Especially when I'm, like, training very seriously, I'll have a specific technique that I have in mind. And I have a sheet of paper on the side where I literally, my head, keep count off how many times I put myself in that position and pulled off the technique. And that's all I care about.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: In, like, training. So I'll just. Whatever it is, if it's a guillotine, it's a guillotine. Arm drag. Arm drag. But I want to make sure I don't. I love numbers, so I'll say, like, I'll make sure I get 50 arm drags.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: I'm not getting off the mat until I do. And that, you know, if it takes.
Speaker B: Drilling or live contest.
Speaker A: So, in this, the thing I'm describing right now is the life contest, but drilling, obviously drilling. So I feel like I can't find a drilling part. Like, it's so hard to find drilling partners. Even so boring. It's. It's annoying to me that this is boring. And there's nothing more annoying to me than the look of boredom on another person's face when we're drilling a. Yeah.
Speaker B: It's like, do you really think drilling is that beneficial to you? Because you said it's a job. Yes.
Speaker A: Yes. He thinks I'm an idiot, but. Yes.
Speaker B: Why?
Speaker A: Why am I. Am I an idiot or why it's extremely beneficial?
Speaker B: Let's go. Let's see what your explanation is. Why is it so beneficial?
Speaker A: I think, for me, there's a meditative aspect to it, where the more you drill, the more you start noticing the details.
Speaker B: Let me.
Speaker A: Minute details.
Speaker B: I'm not gonna push back all the way, because. So every time if I was wrestling, I'll warm up high, crouching, like, whatever, right? But even so, say, like, at a high level, when I'm really wrestling ten years ago, even during that drill portion, if we talk about the resistance of our opponent from zero to 100, it's very likely that my partner at that point, because people I'm really comfortable with, they're probably at least going 20 or 30. Right. They're probably giving me a certain look with the sprawl or, you know, I gotta get through their hands. If I. If I don't set it up right, they might put their arm down. Right. So it's like, we are drilling. Cause we're wrestling at a really low resistance level, but there's a little bit of sparring. The 20%.
Speaker A: The 20.
Speaker B: Yeah, yeah, yeah. So that's not all. That's not really drilling. Cause I think of drilling, I think, literally, you're shooting, and I'm just, boom, your dummy.
Speaker A: Boom, boom, boom.
Speaker B: Boom type of thing.
Speaker A: No, it's very hard to be a dummy that doesn't do 20%. So you're gonna do 20%? Yeah, that's so.
Speaker B: Yes, but that's, like, sparring a little bit, then.
Speaker A: No, but they're not really resisting. They're just giving you the right frame. They're. They're giving you the right, like, movement, and they're being. They're being an intelligent dummy. Yeah, surely. I mean, but also, like, the really important component of this is you pick the techniques for which it's beneficial. If the technique is. Has dynamic elements to it, you don't want to be doing that with. I'm saying, like, there's certain moves, and I like those moves, and I select the game base in those moves that, like.
Speaker B: So, are you drilling to get better? Are you drilling just to work out?
Speaker A: No, to get better. That's what I'm trying to tell you. I believe you can become, like, exceptionally good very fast by drilling.
Speaker B: But how?
Speaker A: First of all, let me. Let me ask you an empirical question. Let me have. Have you actually drilled 10,000 times a particular move?
Speaker B: Millions, million? Hundreds of thousands, likely.
Speaker A: I think you're just saying numbers. I don't think. You know what?
Speaker B: Astronomical. It's way more. 10,000.
Speaker A: I don't think there was a ten.
Speaker B: Year period where I wrestled every single day.
Speaker A: That's.
Speaker B: That's 3000 days. So you're telling me 10,000, that's only three of them a day. I did way more than that.
Speaker A: Three of them.
Speaker B: Probably 30 of them a day. That's. That's a hundred thousand.
Speaker A: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker B: Hundreds of thousands.
Speaker A: I doubt you get 30 a day.
Speaker B: For I did for. I am for sure 100%. There's no doubt.
Speaker A: All right.
Speaker B: Because some days I might do 100. Right? So 30. 30 is not very many, especially if we count all reps, if we're counting drilling and live. So, like, our coach, college coach, would make us just drill a lot, and I always hated it, so I would. I would rebel and just kind of give a little spar, you know, you shoot a high crotch. We'll start you. Coach wants to drill high crouch. Okay, we'll start. You shoot the high crotch. That's great. Then I'm gonna sit the corner. I'm gonna give you my hip, or I'm gonna. You know, I'm gonna try something. So then you have to react. And I would argue that all skill level past, like the beginner stuff, is some necessity of that. Right. I'm going to do this, then. What are you going to do? It's back and forth. I shoot single leg. What are you going to do? I shoot high crouch. What are you going to do? And you have to start unconsciously programming these things in your head, because if you're consciously thinking about it, it's going to be too slow to actually hit it a map.
Speaker A: But the drilling is the unconscious programming.
Speaker B: But the simple movement, the first simple movement. The first simple movement, that single leg or the high crotch or arm drag, whatever. Like, I feel like the amount you're gonna get better at it is so minuscule compared to the amount you're gonna gain at doing other things around it.
Speaker A: You see? No, but that's the key word. You feel. Okay, that's your opinion.
Speaker B: If we did. If we did a study on it, that I would be proven correct?
Speaker A: No. Perhaps so. First of all, your brain, as an exceptionally creative combat athlete, it's clear that you don't like the boredom of drilling. Like, it's obvious that you. That you have, like, you're such a creative energy that you're just not going to be somebody who's going to enjoy that. So enjoyment is probably having an active mind is really important. So the question is, do you have the kind of makeup that has an active mind during a drilling on a dummy? And I have that mind like I.
Speaker B: Can you really think? Okay, so if you're. Let's pick a technique. What technique do you want to drill?
Speaker A: A lot I would do in jiu jitsu or wrestling, whatever you want. It's hard to describe with words, but certain guard passes. Let me. Let me think. Just guard pass.
Speaker B: Okay, so you have a guard pass and you get it to be as a nine and a half out of ten. Right. Just from a technical standpoint, don't you think you need some resistance to feel? Because essentially all, all benefit after that is going to be, what are they going to try to do to me? And if they ship their that way, do I need to single here, move there? So it's like I. So I. I actually think we're agreeing, but maybe terminology wise.
Speaker A: Well, the split is the important thing. Like how much of each?
Speaker B: So I think it is sparring. Like, I think it's a very light touch. Spar is what you're talking about, which is, in my opinion, really isn't drilling. And it's because drilling past the basic proficiency, I don't think brings much value.
Speaker A: But that's what I'm trying to tell you, is I think it does. I think. I think if doing that same movement. I think you begin to learn more over time. Like you're saying, like, once you get the basic proficiency, then there's diminishing returns. I don't think so.
Speaker B: Yeah, that's our thing.
Speaker A: I don't think so. I think everything has diminishing returns when you're learning a technique, but with something.
Speaker B: As complex as wrestling or grappling. If you can have way more gains over here, why focus on going from a 9.7 to a 9.8 if this other area, if you're spending so much time here that there's other areas left unexplored and you can make gigantic gains over there?
Speaker A: No, but you're going to lose. I think a lot depends on your style. I think a lot is determined by how good you are at one thing. And so if you want to become a master of a particular thing and then make your whole game where it's all pulled into that system, then, I don't know.
Speaker B: I think one is too small of a number.
Speaker A: Yeah, small. I feel like you can't be easily this. Like, I. Yeah, you want.
Speaker B: You want to funnel. You want to create funnels?
Speaker A: Funnels.
Speaker B: Funnels. Right. Where everything goes into a few positions, and then it's ideally 100%. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker A: But, like, I feel you can get, like, drilling on a dummy 80% of the time and 20% of the time live rolling with people worse than you? Like, a little bit worse than you or a lot worse than you.
Speaker B: Yeah. So I think so. I think. I definitely think so. My. My buildup would be teach. So we're talking complex technique, right? So by the time we're talking, we'll say a light, late high school kid who's pretty proficient. He's probably done the drilling part. So then now it's like, okay, if I want to get something new to you, I'll probably tell you, you'll probably be able to do the basic premise within five to ten minutes, if they're good, right, do this. Okay. They do it. Then it's like, okay, so now, here's from here what we're gonna do. We're gonna go light sparring. So I know you have success. Cause I need you to complete the task in order to get better at it. That's something a lot of people in wrestling mess up, is they just wanna go to the toughest person. But if you go to the toughest person, you're not gonna actually execute on any skills. You're gonna get a workout, but you're not. And I need you to execute. Cause I need you to get good at this. In order to get good at it, you have to get all the way through the technique.
Speaker A: Why do you need them to complete? Just so they gain confidence in the technique or go through.
Speaker B: They have to feel all the way through. Like, if I said, learn a high crotch when you're drilling, but stop halfway every time, but you're not actually going to be able to do it because you're going to stop. You're not going to feel so, you know, try it on someone. Spar lightly, get it. Do it on someone who's not as good as you get it. Then kind of work your way up the ladder so you can get it on someone your own skill level or maybe better than you. Right. In a live competition. So it's like, I don't know, I feel like that basic drilling, like, um, so a kid like Keegan, who I brought up a few times, like, I feel like if there's something new, I could literally tell him, like, this is what I want you to do. And he's such a great feel. Like he could go drill it proficiently within probably a minute or two. But then to hit it on someone high level, that's going to take quite a while longer.
Speaker A: And that's a mix of drilling and sparring on people a little bit worse than you.
Speaker B: Yeah. And then. Yeah. Then equal and then better. Yeah.
Speaker A: Okay. Yeah.
Speaker B: Because there's, there's, there's just with, with grappling, there's such, like a feel component to the pressure, the movement and all these things. And there's still. I said there's so many things you can throw at someone out of one position. Not just moves, but moves at different levels of force or whatever.
Speaker A: Are you and these kids developing, like, a big picture strategy of, like, what are the main setups and takedowns and just like a whole system?
Speaker B: Um, so we, you know, as kind of sent your technique book. Right. And how we kind of go at approach it. So I think in wrestling, you're going to need. You're going to need a handful of things. Just off the. Off the word go. Right. You're going to. So I think on our feet, I need to build tech this side of the body. I need to build tech that side of the body. I need to be able to bring you underneath me. I need to be able to go around you. Right now, we can accomplish those different ways, but we should have all of those weapons if we want to be really good some way. Right. Um, so if I neglect one of those. So if I neglect the ability to, say, pull you down right from headlock, you. Um, now, if I have a good shot and you're smart, you're just going to lower your stance. So my shot is not going to be as successful, and I have the inability to pull you down. Right. So I kind of need all of those so I can. As they get better, I can point those things out, um, on bottom, my folks out bottom. There's certain things like, you have to be good at leg right, defense. Right. You have to. I mean, at high level, or you're just gonna. You're gonna get. When you get it in, you're just gonna get stuck there. Not gonna be able to escape. But besides that, yeah, there's a. There's a multitude of things you can choose from, and I'm gonna. Depending on your body style and what you're good and bad at, I'm gonna probably develop something a little different I might give you. Hey, you do the quad pod, you be better as a knee slide, whatever. Yeah. And top, kind of same thing.
Speaker A: I have to ask you about Khabib. So I remember a while ago, Rogan said that that's a perfect fight for Khabib. You are. So let me ask two questions. The first, do you think you can beat him in an MMA match when you're at your peak?
Speaker B: Yeah, I don't like. Yeah, I mean, this is one of those people where people, like, will get really mad at me if I say yes. But, yeah, I mean.
Speaker A: But how would you do it? How would you solve that puzzle?
Speaker B: Yeah, I mean, we would grapple, and I think I would be better than him, but I. You know, I feel weird saying, as people. Yeah, right. You're full of shit, you know, and. But that's. No. No one out grappled them, right? I mean, nobody did. And maybe I'm wrong on this, but I. If we will get the best possible candidates, I'm definitely one of them, and then obviously, I'd have a small size advantage, too.
Speaker A: So in a wrestling match, so we can just reduce that MMA match to a wrestling match, what do you think is the right strategy on him? Like, do you understand his style, that the. His wrestling style, the pressure he applies? Do you understand how the hell he makes it happen?
Speaker B: Yeah. I mean, he never, unfortunately, fought any real, who, I would say really, really high level wrestlers. I was actually really disappointed how bad Justin Gaethje's wrestling was, because Justin Gaethje had some solid success, but his wrestling was really bad in that fight.
Speaker A: Gaethje had success in CWA.
Speaker B: Yeah, I think he was 7th place, maybe, or somewhere. He was definitely all american. It was lower, though. So, yeah, I would like to see how he dealt with someone who was like, who? I think, oh, man, this guy's a really high level wrestler because, you know, we saw, and this is early in his career, but, you know, Glason Tebow did give him some issues earlier in his career, so I would like to see him in that situation and see how he does. I would love to. Like, you know, like I tell you, I just love wrestling. Grappling, like, yeah, I'd love this. Someone said, hey, Benjen, you know, Khabib wants to roll with you. Okay. I'm there tomorrow. It sounds like a blast. Let's go.
Speaker A: It's probably competitive as hell.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: You're still competitive.
Speaker B: I know when to be and when not to be. Like, you know, say if I'm going to high school kids or not going to be competitive, because then I'm just being a dick.
Speaker A: How would you take them down? What?
Speaker B: Real wrestling? Wrestling. Wrestling.
Speaker A: Wrestling, wrestling.
Speaker B: I would probably try to text single eggs and stuff.
Speaker A: Single eggs?
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Haven't. Okay.
Speaker B: I mean, I have. No, I've. Honestly, I don't have the slightest clue. I'd have to feel. I'd feel him out, but single leg is my best take.
Speaker A: But people talk about his wrestling being really good. People that train with him, so.
Speaker B: Okay. So I grilled someone, I will not say who on the Ed Ruth thing. Cause Ed Ruth is very elite at focused on wrestling. He never became that great at fighting, unfortunately.
Speaker A: Wait, Ed Ruth wrestled Khabib?
Speaker B: They were on the same team for a while. Yeah.
Speaker A: Okay.
Speaker B: And there was rumors that Khabib beat him up, and I said, I sure can't believe that. And I've heard that that was. If they were just straight wrestling, Ed would get slightly the better of it.
Speaker A: Well, Edwards is, like, one of the greats.
Speaker B: He's great. He's really good. Yeah. So that was what I heard. But in an MMA setting, because of all the tools that Khabib would get.
Speaker A: Him, I don't know what. But I agree. I agree with Rogan on this one. That would have been good to see.
Speaker B: Yeah, that would be fun. So, yeah, if Khabib wants to work out, I'd love it. I love. I love wrestling and grappling. I don't do much jujitsu, because I just don't have time for it anymore. I'm at the wrestling academy, like, every single day, but yeah. I love jujitsu. Well, I did it. And, you know, if I didn't have wrestling academies, I probably would still be doing jujitsu. Yeah.
Speaker A: You did well in jiu jitsu as well. But let me ask you a ridiculous question. Who's the greatest of all time? Freestyle or folk style?
Speaker B: Oh, wrestling.
Speaker A: Wrestling. Hmm.
Speaker B: Well, I will say my knowledge past, like the year 2000 island really not that great because you.
Speaker A: Which direction? Sorry? After 2000?
Speaker B: No, before because you can't find any film or anything, you know, and so you hear of all.
Speaker A: So you need evidence, you need direct evidence.
Speaker B: I want to be able to watch them and see them and feel the times and feel their opponents and, you know, all those things to really like. I hate giving bad answers, you know, so I would. There's just not enough footage of any of those people, you know, we took. We go back to someone like Alexander medved, like, you can't find footage. You can't find anything on it. You know, it's like, who is he wrestling? I, you know, I'm not sure. So post 2000, I think, and obviously just freestyle. So Americans has the, probably the best argument post 2000, I think said July of if he had the russian tank that guys.
Speaker A: Yeah. So who's, who's better, Snyder or sad?
Speaker B: July. I just wanted the Olympics.
Speaker A: I understand this. I understand how that works. But there's pretty close, right? Not really. Not that match, but in general, the matchup, so.
Speaker B: Well, so Kyle won the first one in 17, said July have pinned him the following year. But then Kyle lost and took bronze in 19 and then just lost. I don't want, I don't want to say fairly decisively, but it was, it was six to three and there was a late takedown. He kind of gave it up and maybe visually competitive, maybe wouldn't have. They're going to wrestle again, like two weeks here. So that, you know. Yeah, you, I mean, you have to say such a live. At this point. There's nothing else to say unless Kyle proves us otherwise.
Speaker A: Yeah, not enough people talk about sedulive. Okay. Why you think that guy should go to MMA? You think Kyle should go to MMa? Some of these guys, yeah, they're making.
Speaker B: Enough money in wrestling where they don't really feel the need to.
Speaker A: It's terrifying, though, as a heavyweight sedgwife would probably. It's like, it's like khabib, but heavyweight.
Speaker B: Well, I don't know if you remember. Do you remember Bilal Makov? So Bilal Makov actually was the russian representative in both styles of 2016, greco and freestyle. And he was, to my knowledge, the only person the UFC has ever signed. That was zero. In modern era signed, that was zero and zero. And then he actually never ended up fighting. But weird, right?
Speaker A: So, yeah, no motivation.
Speaker B: I don't know what the story is because sometimes out of Russia, I mean, maybe you have better sources than I do. Sometimes it feels like dudes just disappear, like they're a world champ or Olympic champ. And all of a sudden you're like, wait, where'd you go?
Speaker A: You talk shit about Russia earlier in the conversation.
Speaker B: So what did I say?
Speaker A: I forgot. But I think steroids. I think somebody's gonna show up to your door.
Speaker B: I'm worried. Honestly. I've said enough bad things where I would be kind of looking over my shoulder if I went to the.
Speaker A: I, for one, loved the Russians.
Speaker B: What about Icarus? How does that make you feel?
Speaker A: What about it? It's fake news.
Speaker B: Oh, really?
Speaker A: I'm just kidding. Yeah, you know, it's troublesome and I hate cheating in all of its forms. Any other, like, recaps from the Olympics of 2020, Tokyo, that stood out to you? Gable, Stevenson? Like, anything like that?
Speaker B: Yeah. No, I think America's coming to the point where we're going to compete with Russia every single year in wrestling, which obviously, you know, long, long time ago, many, many. We did. We were great. And then kind of after that Soviet Union period, I think there was a lot of poverty in that area, and that kind of led the wrestling team going down a little bit. And then obviously a lot of those regions where they found oil and gas in the Caspian Sea, I believe. And they've been really kind of on the upswing for the last 20 years. And now America really, since 2012, has been on the upswing in wrestling, and we're kind of really competing with them and they're not sending a couple of their best guys. So, Oslo. So for those who don't know, the Olympics got pooped back in the air. So they are hosting the world 2021 world championships despite the fact that we just had the Olympics two months ago. So it's happening next week in Oslo, Norway. So, like, Russia is not sending their number one at 57 and number one at 65. So it's like, America's probably going to win, I think. I don't want to guarantee anything, but there's. There's a really good chance all those guys competing, America gave any of the Olympians that meddled the opportunity to not even have to wrestle off. They just got to keep the spots. Since it was two months later if they medaled. So the only one who's not is gable. Gable is moving on. We have a pretty good guy behind him named Nick Wisdowski, who's a world medalist, but then he's a burlesque field in the 79 spot, Jaden Coxfield in the 92 spot, who's a world champion also. So we have.
Speaker A: It's a hell of a team.
Speaker B: Pretty good squad.
Speaker A: Yeah, pretty good squad. So given your run in Bellator in one championship, that was like one of the most dominant runs in MMA, what would you say was, like, key to your dominance in that long undefeated streak, huh?
Speaker B: Probably consistency would be one. The fact that I just. I lived and trained the same way no matter where my life was. Whereas a lot of fighters, once they start making money for the first time, they have all these obligations and they travel and they really enjoy making money. And that's kind of why some of them fall off.
Speaker A: She had like, the same process, like the same camp and my house.
Speaker B: I didn't vacation. Yeah, everything just. No, you know, and so that was a big part of it. Obviously, the style thing is like, no one could. There was only a few people who could stop my style. And I think I continued to get better as a mixed martial artist, and I wasn't as innovative in mixed martial arts, but there was a handful of things. Then I innovated. You're specifically in the top position where I spent a lot of time, where just like, there was just once I got on top of you, it was like in a spider web, and there was just kind of no way out, you know, you never felt the certain things I was doing. And so people just. They gave up eventually.
Speaker A: How's the level of wrestling in MMA, would you say? So I saw somewhere like champions, the most popular martial art for current UFC champions are all wrestling. Wrestling.
Speaker B: So we just lost a bunch of the belts. Wrestling. Wrestling as a sport. Right. But, yeah, one point we had, I think it was eight of nine, maybe, or something to that effect. And I think. I think it's not just wrestling, not just the actual martial art of wrestling that contributes to our success in mixed martial arts, but other things. Like this is the way we're systemized. So most kids reach high level sets, have went through the high school program and the college program, and they know how to show up on time and they know how to work hard. So when they go to ATT or aka or wherever, they know how to show up on time and they know how to work hard, and that's going to get you a really long way. Just those two things, right?
Speaker A: Not even the techniques, it's just the discipline.
Speaker B: Those things. Then I think you throw on top of the fact that most of us have competed 1500 to 2000 times, probably by the time we get to 20, something like, that's a huge advantage, too. Most of these other people from other disciplines maybe have competed 100, if that, right? So we have this competitive process down really, really, really well.
Speaker A: Plus the weight cut.
Speaker B: The weight cut. There's all these things, right. That factor into it. I think the fact that we're really open minded, like, I think if you would. I don't pick on Jiu Jitsu again, but, like, how many jiu jitsu guys have became highly proficient in wrestling versus how many wrestling guys have became highly proficient in Jiu Jitsu? I think that number swings one way and not that much the other way, you know? So we're open to adapting and learning. And for some reason, like Jiu jitsu people, how many of them have got high level wrestling or even mediocre wrestling? The number's really small. Like, they refuse to. It's really frustrating. Like, why won't they do this? This is obviously part of it. You know, I don't pick on specific guys, but there's certain guys in the history of MMA where you're like, listen, man, I mean, Damian Maia, who's my last fight, is a great example of someone who actually did get proficient wrestling, right? But there's some of these jiu jitsu guys. It's like, if you just got on top, you would submit him. Why can't you learn a freaking takedown? Like, holy moly. Like, just learn how to take someone down. Once you get them down, they will not get up and you win the fight. Like, it's so easy, you know, but they refuse.
Speaker A: How complicated is that journey? So, like, Donna, her that you mentioned, CrAig Jones, they're big on wrestling as part of Jiu Jitsu now. Like, wrestling not just on the feet, but wrestling from the bottom coming up and all that kind of stuff. So how difficult is that whole skillset, would you say, for jujitsu person to learn?
Speaker B: Um, not that hard if they really put their mind to it, because they already, like, when you grapple and this is any grappling art, like, there's a certain part of it that you kind of get, and it can. Might not be the exact same thing, but you understand how your body moves and how to feel certain pressures, and you can adapt yourself pretty quickly, you know? So I don't think. I think there's just a certain level of stubbornness where they didn't want to. Certain people didn't want to do it for whatever reason. I think a lot of times in MMA is the I'm so macho, I can stand and bang thing, you know, where they want, you know, show how much. Oh, they are. But, yeah, that was a frustrating one, that they. There's a lot of wrestlers who became highly proficient in Jujitsu and really adapted, and it doesn't go the other way. And then, I guess the other thing there, too, is. But they can both steal from each other, right? As any. As any martial art can steal from another. And I feel like jiu Jitsu didn't do enough stealing from wrestling. Like, they should have looked at all the wrestling possible and said, well, why don't we steal that and that and, like, hey, let's take that over. And maybe we'd make a little tweak because it's different, but there's something we can definitely use there. So, like, in wrestling, for example, you know, there's a one arm guillotine in Jinnah, right? Okay. So there's a move called. Well, it's got harder names, like the oldest move in wrestling, because it's what they did, the cows, where they go around the chin and they throw them on their back. I don't recall that one.
Speaker A: I don't know. Okay, sorry. Did you just ask me what I call that one?
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Would you take a cow and grab it by the side?
Speaker B: No, but in wrestling, I don't know. Okay.
Speaker A: We call you putting it under.
Speaker B: Yeah. So you grab their chin, and then you go under their arm, and then throw them on their back.
Speaker A: Okay. Gotcha. Yeah.
Speaker B: Yeah. So we call that the honey badger.
Speaker A: But it's got honey badger.
Speaker B: Different names. Wherever you go, it's got different names. So I would always. I would say, like, pre jiu jitsu, I was. I was AveRage at it. Like, I could do it, but against good people, you'd never get it for. Because I'll tell you what. Because they would get the back of their head up, and they're too strong where you couldn't collapse them by going over their neck. Right. Because the forces weren't. Right. So then in Jiu Jitsu, you learn the one arm GuillOtine, where you grab their Chin, and this is more of running along the side of their head. And then. And then you go here and you choke them. Right. Much more efficient way to move their head because the fulcrum is way down here, and their head can move into that. Right? So once I learned that in Jiu JItsu, I'm like, wait, I can do this in wrestling. So now once I learn how to grab their chin the right WAy and I do the HONey Badger, no one ever gets out. I just had to steal that JuJitsu, put it in wrestling, and boom, there we go.
Speaker A: But very few people steal any direction. That takes creativity, really, and open mindedness.
Speaker B: So easy because it's already done. You just got steal it.
Speaker A: I mean, same with judo. If you're a Gi jutsu person, there's so much stuff in judo that that's ripe for the stealing, because judo is much more emphasizes explosive moves on the transition, which is something jiu jitsu does.
Speaker B: Not do, because you have seen from the takedown, too.
Speaker A: From the takedown, but also just in general, just in the transition. The. The concept of transition, the, like, jujitsu is very much about, like, we're in this position, then we're in this position, then we're in this position.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: The. The judo is much more in when it. When there's chaos of any kind.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: That's when you need to strike and to learn that. I mean, that's why people like Travis Stevens and Judoka, when they go to Jiu jitsu, they can dominate. But jiu jitsu, people should steal, too.
Speaker B: Stubborn.
Speaker A: Yeah, but so is every wrestlers are stubborn, too.
Speaker B: No way. There would never be any stubborn wrestlers.
Speaker A: Well, I mean, I was surprised, you know, all these coaches, John Smith, Dan Gable, they don't really have interest in MMA or Jiu Jitsu and so on, like. But you would think somebody like a John Smith would, like, put on a white belt and roll around.
Speaker B: Yeah, I think he's just too focused on, you know, he's a coach. What he's a coach and what he's doing. Yeah. I mean, yeah, I think if you. If you take him when he's younger, he would have had a lot of fun. We actually have a really good wrestler making his MMA debut tomorrow, and if you bo nickel, I'm sure you've heard of him. Very high level. I think he's going to have a lot of success.
Speaker A: I mean, some people might say that, like, jiu Jitsu makes you a little comfortable being in your back, and for a wrestler, that could be, like, really bad.
Speaker B: I hate that take.
Speaker A: Yeah, but that's the Dan Gable take.
Speaker B: It's so stupid. It's so stupid. For God's sakes, we know the fucking rules. Wrestling, you don't go to your back. And Jujitsu, you can. It's like, whatever.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: But, like, jiu Jitsu, for example. So I coached, when I was at Rufus, I coached the wrestling for long, three, four, five years. So I've been taking a jujitsu guy and teaching them a wrestling technique where you needed to use your feet to teach jiu jitsu. Guy is so easy, so simple, because they already understand the concept. Butterfly guard, etcetera, et cetera, et cetera. Right. To take a wrestler who's never done any of it and teach him how to use his feet. Oh, my God, it's such a beast. It's so hard, you know, because they just, that's not a weapon they're thinking about using. So it's like, we understand the rules. It's like freestyle. Focus on wrestling. Freestyle for the man. I can lock my hands. You don't see people locking their hands all the time in folk style just because they did freestyle. It's like, they get it. There's a rule. They understand it. So the notion that somehow you get.
Speaker A: Comfortable in your back, but pinning, that's like a. It has a special meaning.
Speaker B: Yeah, I actually think so. Jiu jitsu, you. You don't actually want to be.
Speaker A: Right.
Speaker B: Flat, flat very often. Right. You want to be.
Speaker A: I always wondered this because I did a couple catch wrestling tournaments, and I did, I would put myself in butterfly guard, and I wasn't going against good people, so, which is why I was doing all these things. But I wondered if you could create a system of wrestling where you're butterfly guard.
Speaker B: So I think there's, there's a few places where I use it, but so, specifically, the elevator series, which is my main series, up bottom. It is. It's not butterfly guard. It's a butterfly guard like, grip with your foot. So I boom. I go here, I catch your leg with my foot. Boom. And I elevate you over. Right? Um, and then also sometimes, like, uh, I think Keegan does it, too, from watching me. But double leg sometimes if I'm accepting. So, freestyle, obviously, you're gonna give a point. You focus up, accepting that you've already got me. And as I go down, I'm just gonna butterfly guard you up, you know, and then I'm gonna try to flip my hip back to the mat and get, end up in a wizard position. Like, I've used that quite a few times, where it's kind of like a bailout mechanism that gives me back to maybe not a great position, but obviously much better. Than being taken down.
Speaker A: Beautiful.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Let me ask you quickly about crypto, because you're also, you have a, you have a show, you have a lot of interest in cryptocurrency. Why are you interested in cryptocurrency? Is it just a financial investment or philosophy that attracts you to it?
Speaker B: So I, my friend told me about it in 2017. I was actually, I went to, I was, I was, my friend met me in Shanghai. I fought in one championship, and he told me, and the second he told me, I'm like, I'm so in. Because I had read Ron Paul and the Fed, I had read, I kind of had an understanding how the Fed is unfair. And so when he told about crypto, this decentralized system that no one has control over, it just made sense. And so we've, the podcast, we had to say Michael Saylor on it, and I love the way he says, it's like, who do you trust more with your money? You trust the politicians or do you trust engineers? I think that's an easy choice. I don't even think, I don't even think I have to think about that. I don't trust politicians. No matter what country they come from, China, America, wherever, I don't trust them.
Speaker A: So. So what about into, in 2017? What was it, bitcoin? Are you, what do you, what do you find? Which ones do you find interesting? Yeah, there's all kinds of ideas. So there's the, the more sort of primal mechanism of proof of work and bitcoin, and then there's smart contracts, ideas, and there's all kinds of innovations across the different.
Speaker B: So I can't say I'm in super deep where I understand the technical components of a lot of them. I understand what bitcoin can do for people. And so that's probably the one I focus the most on. And I actually, I think I was talking about, I was trying to convince Michael to talk about bitcoin because he hates it also when he did it last night. And I think most of the main problems bitcoin solves, people in America are so american centric, they don't understand it. So, like, high levels of inflation, that hasn't happened in what's starting to happen. It hasn't happened in America in a long time. Right. But someone in Venezuela is like, oh, I get that. You know, or remittance payments. Right. Remittance payments to, you see it. So I saw this in, when I was spending all time in Singapore. Singapore is obviously a really wealthy country, and so you'd have indonesian workers or Filipino, and they would all go on Sundays. They would go to these places to ship stuff back to their families. And through Western Union. Western union gouges the shit out of these people. I mean, they're taking 810, 12% of whatever they're sending. Then it takes five days and the person's gonna pick it up. Whereas bitcoin, I could send you bitcoin person to person. Right? So like, american people don't understand that. American people don't really understand the unbanked, right. A decent portion of the world is unbanked. They don't have access to it. And a much, much, much smaller portion of the world doesn't have access to Internet. So if I can put a mobile wallet on your phone and we can send money person to person. So there's a whole bunch of those problems where Americans don't really think about that, are really obvious that this solves. So I think that's a key one. Obviously, the fact that the value goes up is really outstanding also. But if you look at it, I got in in 2017, so I got to watch it go up. I didn't sell shit at the top. Really stupid. And then the majority of my time was spent through the bear market. And so I had to love it for the principles that it provided, not the fact that actually I actually lost money in the beginning and now im way up. But yeah, so I just holding, just holding. I think at the top of this bull market, ill probably sell a very small portion.
Speaker A: You mean like right now theres a bull market?
Speaker B: Yeah. Most people think, say in the next three to six months will be the top of the market. And so probably when that happens, I'll probably sell a little bit.
Speaker A: You gotta hodl it, Ben.
Speaker B: You gotta ho well, yeah, so my pod, one of my podcast co hosts, he's like super Rich, like Uber rich. So he has lost touch with the everyman.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: So here's my argument to him. It's really simple. And listen, I'm doing well for myself in life. But if, say someone buys a bitcoin, right, one bitcoin at $5,000, which it was last year, and this bitcoin goes from five thousand dollars to two hundred thousand dollars, which is right around what a lot of people think the peak is going to be. They bought one bitcoin and they are living in a $200,000 house. So to take half of that, you started $5,000 of bitcoin to sell half a bitcoin for $100,000 and pay off your house, your remaining house payment. That's life changing to someone. It really is. You still have a bitcoin. So if bitcoin goes to a million, you're still going to have half a million, and you're going to feel really, really rich with that half a million dollars because you bought it for having $2,500, you know.
Speaker A: Yeah. So, yeah.
Speaker B: So I would encourage anyone who's not uber rich to, if you have huge profits, take a little bit of them, because it could change your life.
Speaker A: And if you hold it and it goes down, you're going to feel the pain of that. Like, sometimes if you're more constrained financially, it's much more psychologically difficult to ride the ups and downs.
Speaker B: Yeah, it is. For sure. They have these really fascinating things in bitcoin. We said the guy, one of the main guys on our podcast, it's called on chain metrics. So all. All wallet transactions are visible, you know, and so they have these. All these fun categories. So I actually. I think you said you don't like.
Speaker A: Numbers, but I like numbers.
Speaker B: Oh, you love numbers. So I love numbers also. So they have all these different categories. Like, you can see how long a wallet has held a bitcoin. Right. Or how many bitcoins are in a certain wallet. And so what they've seen during this downturn. Right. So April, it kind of peaked and went down, is that the whales are still buy. So whales, people of a thousand or more are still buying. They've said the main group of sellers is the ones who held it from zero to three months. So, like, they don't have money. They bought it because they thought it was going up. And I was like, oh, shit, I got to sell it, right. Whereas anyone who's held for a long time is generally still holding on to it.
Speaker A: That's interesting. That's a good indicator, right? For the whole space, yeah. Well, let me ask you for some advice. You've been through one heck of a career, one heck of a life. What advice would you give to a young person today?
Speaker B: Well, in wrestling, I think wrestling is really a microcosm of what your life's going to be. And that's why one of the things that I stress the kids is, like, if we can go through this now, and you figure I have a couple kids who are struggling with certain things right now, if you can figure out this now and wrestling, it's gonna be a lot better to figure out now and get over this mental hump than when you're 32 and you have two kids and. Right. And your job's not going well. It's gonna be a lot worse. Could be a lot more painful then let's. Let's fucking figure it out now. So a lot of these things, a lot of these lessons we learn from wrestling, whether it's persistence or perseverance or work ethic or, you know, I said, wrestlers show up on time and they work hard. Right. These things, if we learn these things at an early age, those are generally those characteristics. Those characteristics will generally carry on throughout our life, and those are the things that are going to make us really successful. So, um, you know, I would say find a great coach, someone who's going to spend a lot of time and put a lot of time into you and make sure they have a lot of wisdom and steal all the wisdom that you can from them. And then if you can be successful at one thing, generally, whatever that recipe was that took you to be successful at that, apply it to everything else. Right? Apply it to the rest of your life. Apply it to getting a life that you enjoy. Apply it to living in a place you want to live, doing a job you want to do. Right. There's so many possibilities, and you just have to be bold enough to go take those chances.
Speaker A: It's interesting because early on in life is when you have much more time. People don't realize this time to learn the lessons. Somehow later in life, you get busier responsibilities and all that kind of stuff. Like high school is a magical time in college. Yeah, there's so much time.
Speaker B: Right.
Speaker A: Learn.
Speaker B: Well, you don't even have kids yet.
Speaker A: Yeah, I don't have kids. Still fills up. Well, no, I. On purpose, and I did something that many people don't seem to be able to do. I walked away from a lot of responsibilities just by saying goodbye.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: But like. But, you know, meetings, like, there's everybody around me at MIT was like, meetings fill the day, and then you have more projects and you do a great job and you become successful, and then more meetings fill the day and more responsibilities, as opposed to, like, wait a minute, do I want to be involved in all these things? And instead do I want to find one or two things to really focus on? And that's what I choose. But, like, that becomes harder and harder and harder as you get older.
Speaker B: No, I mean, I'm sure. And also, the more success you have, you become sought after other places, too. I'm sure that's happening with you.
Speaker A: And it's hard to keep saying, no, no, no.
Speaker B: Saying that was hard yeah.
Speaker A: You're known for roasting people with a single boom, roasted line. So any ideas? Maybe you want to mention malice, but any ideas come to mind when you.
Speaker B: Look at me, man, you know what? If I was going to, boom, roast someone, I would want to kind of, like, research their career and dissect them and figure out their biggest negative, get to the core. And I didn't have that notion with you. I figured I got a general sense of, okay, he's really successful. He's super sharp. He's really interested in some really interesting things. I bet we'll have a great conversation. But I had no intention to roast you.
Speaker A: Yeah, there you go. What about malice? You had dinner with him last night.
Speaker B: Hmm? For him? Oh, man.
Speaker A: How'd you get to know him, by the way? Just Twitter. Just Twitter.
Speaker B: Where's the most magical place in the world, right? I always tell people it's a great source of information if you know how to use it. Hmm.
Speaker A: He's insane on Twitter.
Speaker B: Actually, I had to unfollow him on Twitter because he was too intense, too much. It fills up, like, I want to be able to consume the content. So if I want to see something, he says, I can go to his page, right? But it's just too much for my timeline. I want to be able to consume who I follow. So I try to not follow a lot of people because I want to be able to consume them. And he was. He was. He was too much. He fights the trolls, which I don't know why you would ever fight the trolls. There's just a too many of them.
Speaker A: Well, he's a troll himself. He's like the big troll fighting the little trolls. He's the king troll.
Speaker B: There's a million of them. So even if you kill, if you kill 100,000, there's still 900,000.
Speaker A: It's the, like, the night walker or whatever.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Well, I'll take it, because you had nothing you could, you couldn't rose GSP out of respect. Yeah, I'm just gonna take that as a sign of respect.
Speaker B: What do you say? Bad about GSP. I was. Now I try to roast his hair. Like, why is he trying to grow. Grow hair now after all these years? He looked good bald. Everyone loved him with his head shaved.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Now it looks kind of strange, like, why you got hair now?
Speaker A: Well, it was one of the more surreal moments of my life is. So he was here, and he wore a black suit and tie.
Speaker B: Oh, really?
Speaker A: Yeah. We did the podcast with him. Just mirror image of me and then we also did. I haven't released it yet, but just a video together, and I was doing a martial arts stuff in the suit and tie, those quits. That was quite. That's like, certain moments in your life are just like, I can't believe I was part of that.
Speaker B: Yeah. From. With GSP. So, yeah, I don't think I have anything to roast him about. I mean, maybe the Matt Serra thing would be the one that you get him with, you know, but, yeah. I would be really fascinated to, like, really dig deep from a sports psychology standpoint, because he always talks about how much fury he had when he was competing. And I. And I find that to be interesting because, obviously. So it's almost like, to me, it's almost like, was he successful despite that? Not because of that. Right. And because anxiety usually leads it. Really negative performance for the majority of people. And what was it about him that the anxiety wasn't super negative? You know what I'm saying? Like, it's very interesting.
Speaker A: I wonder that, too. So I have. I wondered that about him, but I have a huge amount of anxiety interacting, especially with people. Just about everything. Yeah. I wonder if that's helpful or not. It feels that, like, it's very helpful.
Speaker B: Well, I think so. I. So, okay. I think in two different. So I think probably your everyday life. Okay, is different than, like, in a performance or a competition.
Speaker A: It's.
Speaker B: You have to be, like, super in the moment of what you're doing. So anything that's pulling you away, like, oh, my gosh, you know, high school kids, right. That coach. Oh, my gosh, my. That girl's in the stands. And if I get beat, then. And they're actually. They're actively thinking about this other thing when this is going on. And I need all 100% of your focus.
Speaker A: Well, he's never. I don't think he has anxiety in the ring. That's the point. I think, like, I have the same thing. Like, if I have a really high performance thing that I have to do, I don't know, election front of a lot of people.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: That'd be a great example that there's huge amount of anxiety weeks ahead, days ahead, hours ahead.
Speaker B: So you have a system to get rid of it, then.
Speaker A: Maybe. But it's just the body gets rid of it somehow. Yeah. There's not a system.
Speaker B: Subconscious system.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: It's so you don't actually have anxiety while you're. So that's like. So then that problem. Somehow that problem has solved itself. Right. The problem is when the anxiety is actually happening while the wrestling match is happening. That's the real issue.
Speaker A: Yeah, but it's, like, sneaks in there, too. That's the difference between MMA and wrestling, is there's no breaks in wrestling, right? Yes, I guess there is. You can look at the crowd a little bit. Like, you can look. So maybe. But, like, the. There's other things we have to perform while there's more breaks. Like a lecture. You can catch yourself thinking, like, in this conversation, you know?
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Like, I'll set a bunch of stuff where I think, why the hell did you say that? That's dumb, right? That that's the anxiety, because there's a pause and that. That. That could be. I don't know. I think it just pushes me to be better, but maybe I could be way better if I let go that. Yeah, it's scary to think that GSB. If you let go that he's been.
Speaker B: Better or did he ever. Did. Did he have a route? Like, you're saying, like, you don't necessarily feel those. So I think certain people that I've coached, like, they would describe how they would feel literally during the wrestling match. Right. And you're saying, like, during the speech performance, it's mostly gone.
Speaker A: Yep.
Speaker B: And that's. That's. It'd be interesting to see if, like, you know, he talked a lot about that, but if it was all. If it was all the way somehow gone. And he means he would have a mechanism for it. So, like, I had a really bad performance my freshman year of high school at nationals because I had. I had the ability to be anxious, and one of my coaches talked about, like. And a lot of a type personalities are kind of that way, you know, because they're trying to consider all possibilities at the same time. And while we're actually performing or competing, it's negative to performance. Right. So he said he would always. Leading up to the match, within, say, an hour, he would. His thing was talking about fishing. He would get someone talk about fishing with him because it would stop him thinking about the match and being uber anxious. So I kind of really took that heart, and it really helped me as I would always, like, have someone to talk to and just. Just goof around about whatever. So I'm not thinking about this thing, and then once I step in, it's time to go. So I didn't have this, like, anxious buildup. Now it's not for me. I took it away. But, like, me, you know, like you said, you have a way to get it away, obviously.
Speaker A: Cause it's yeah, I guess so. I guess there's little, little tricks you come up with. Yeah, you start thinking about it's not fishing. Maybe I should try the fishing thing.
Speaker B: But I hate fishing. So boring.
Speaker A: Well, maybe. Maybe it's good to think about that. All right, Ben, this is like I told you, I'm a big fan. I'm a big fan of your wrestling, your fighting, your personality. Thank you for coming down. Thank you for talking today. Huge honor. Bam. Let's go wrestle. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Ben Askren. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Muhammad Ali. Only a man who knows what it is like to be defeated can reach down to the bottom of his soul and come up with the extra ounce of power it takes to win when the match is even. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
