Transcription for Israel-Palestine Debate： Finkelstein, Destiny, M. Rabbani & Benny Morris ｜ Lex Fridman Podcast #418.mp3:
Full transcript: That's a good point. No, no, that's a good point. Now, some people accuse me of speaking very slowly, and they're advised on YouTube to turn up the speed twice to three times whenever I'm on. One of the reasons I speak slowly is because I attach value to every word I say. Norm will say this all over and over and over again. I only deal in facts. I don't deal in hypotheticals. I only deal in facts. I only deal in facts. And that seems to be the case, except for when the facts are completely and totally contrary to the particular point you're trying to push. The idea that Jews would have out of hand, rejected any state that had Arabs on it, or always had a plan of expulsion is just betrayed by the acceptance of the 47 partition. I don't think you understand politics. They forced the British to prevent emigration of Jews, Muslim Europe, and reaching safe shores in Palestine. Again. They did. Again. And they knew that the was Palestine persecuted in Europe? Was Palestine the, the only spot of land on earth? Yes. Basically that was the problem. The Jews couldn't immigrate. What about your great friends in Britain, the architects of the Balfour decade, by the late 1930s? What about the United States? Weren't happy to take in Jews, and the Americans weren't happy? And why are Palestinians, who were not Europeans, who had zero role in the rise of Nazism, who had no relation to any of this? Why are they somehow uniquely responsible for what happened in Europe and uniquely coastal? It was the only safe haven for. Jews, Professor Morris, because of your logic, and I'm not disputing it, that's why October 7 happened. Oh, my God. Because there was no options left for those people. The Hamas guys who attacked the kibbutzim, apart from the attacks on the military sites, when they attacked the kibbutzim, were out to kill civilians, and they killed family after family, house after house. Talk fast. I'm trying to think that youre coherent. I'm just reading from the UN. Yeah, but you know you like them. Only when they agree with you, though you've lied about this instance in the past. Those kids weren't just on the beach, as is often stated in articles. Those kids were literally coming out of a previously identified Hamas compound they have operated from. They literally did. You can't. With all due respect, you're such a fantastic moron, it's terrifying. The following is a debate on the topic of Israel and Palestine with Norman Finkelstein, Benny Morris, Muin Rabani, and Stephen Banel, also known online as Destiny Norm and Benny are historians. Muin is a Middle east analyst and Steven is a political commentator and streamer. All four have spoken and debated extensively on this topic. The goal for this debate was not for anyone to win or to score points. It wasn't to get views or likes. I never care about those, and I think there are probably much easier ways to get those things if I did care. The goal was to explore together the history, present and future of Israel and Palestine in a free flowing conversation. No time limits, no rules. There was a lot of tension in the room from the very beginning, and it only got more intense as we went along. And I quickly realized that this very conversation, in a very real human way, was a microcosm of the tensions and distance and perspectives on the topic of Israel and Palestine. For some debates, I will step in and moderate strictly to prevent emotion from boiling. For this, I saw the value in not interfering with the passion of the exchanges because that emotion in itself spoke volumes. We did talk about the history and the future, but the anger, the frustration, the biting wit, and at times respect and camaraderie were all there. Like I said, we did it in an perhaps all too human way. I will do more debates and conversations on these difficult topics and I will continue to search for hope in the midst of death and destruction, to search for our common humanity in the midst of division and hate. This thing we have going on, human civilization, the whole of it is beautiful and it's worth figuring out how we can help it flourish together. I love you all. This is Alex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Norman Finkelstein, Benny Morris, Mullion Rabbani, and Stephen Bonnell. First question is about 1948. For Israelis, 1948 is the establishment of the state of Israel and the war of independence. For Palestinians, 1948 is the Nakba, which means catastrophe or the displacement of 700,000 Palestinians from their homes as a consequence of the war. What to you is important to understand about the events of 1948 and the period around there, 47 49, that helps us understand what's going on today and maybe helps us understand the roots of all this that started even before 1948. I was hoping that Norm could speak first and Benny, then Wayne, and then Steve. Norm after World War two, the British decided that they didn't want to deal with the Palestine question anymore and the ball was thrown into the court of the United nations. Now, as I read the record, the UN was not attempting to arbitrate or adjudicate rights and wrongs. It was confronting a very practical problem. There were two national communities in Palestine and there were irreconcilable differences on fundamental questions. Most importantly, looking at the historic record on the question of immigration and associated with the question of immigration, the question of lend UN Special Committee on Palestine, which came into being before the UN 181 partition resolution, the UN special committee recommended two states in Palestine. There was a minority position, represented by Iran, India, Yugoslavia. They supported one state, but they believed that if forced to, the two communities would figure out some sort of modusivendi and live together. United Nations General assembly supported partition between what it called a jewish state and an arab state. Now, in my reading of the record, and I understand there's new scholarship in the subject which I've not read, but so far as I've read the record, there's no clarity on what the United Nations General assembly meant by a jewish state and an arab state, except for the fact that the jewish state would be demographically, the majority would be jewish and the arab state demographically would be arab. The UNSCOP, the UN Special Committee on Palestine, it was very clear and it was reiterated many times, that in recommending two states, each state, the arab state and the jewish state would have to guarantee full equality of all citizens with regard to political, civil and religious matters. Now, that does raise the question if there is absolute full equality of all citizens, both in the jewish state and the arab state with regard to political rights, civil rights and religious rights, apart from the demographic majority, it's very unclear what it meant to call a state jewish or call a state arab. In my view, the partition resolution was the correct decision. I do not believe that the arab and jewish communities could, at that point, be made to live together. I disagree with the minority position of India, Iran and Yugoslavia, and that, not being a practical option, two states was the only other option. In this regard, I would want to pay tribute to what was probably the most moving speech at the UN General assembly proceedings by the soviet foreign minister Gromyko. I was very tempted to quote it at length, but I recognized that would be taking too much time, so I asked a young friend, Jamie Stern Weiner, to edit it and just get the essence of what Foreign Minister Gromyko had to say. During the last war, Gromyko said, the jewish people underwent exceptional sorrow and suffering. Without any exaggeration, this sorrow and suffering are indescribable. Hundreds of thousands of Jews are wandering about in various countries of Europe in search of means of existence and in search of shelter. The United nations cannot and must not regard this situation with indifference. Past experience, particularly during the second World War, shows that no western european state was able to provide adequate assistance for the jewish people in defending its rights and its very existence from the violence of the Hitlerites and their allies. This is an unpleasant fact, but unfortunately, like all other facts, it must be admitted. Gromyko went on to say, in principle, he supports one state or the Soviet Union supports one state. But he said, if relations between the jewish and arab populations of Palestine proved to be so bad that it would be impossible to reconcile them and to ensure the peaceful coexistence of the Arabs and the Jews, the Soviet Union would support two states. I personally am not convinced that the two states would have been unsustainable in the long term if, and this is a big if, the zionist movement had been faithful to the position it proclaimed during the UNSCop public hearings at the time Ben Gurion testified, I want to express what we mean by a jewish state. We mean by a jewish state simply a state where the majority of the people are Jews, not a state where a jew has in any way any privilege. More than anyone else. A jewish state means a state based on absolute equality of all her citizens and on democracy. Alas, this was not to be. As Professor Morris has written, zionist ideology and practice were necessarily and elementally expansionist. And then he wrote in another book, transferred. The euphemism for expulsion. Transfer was inevitable and inbuilt into Zionism because it sought to transform a land which was arab into a jewish state, and a jewish state could not have arisen without a major displacement of arab population. And because this aim automatically produced resistance among the Arabs, which in turn persuade the Yeshiv's leaders, the Yeshua being the jewish community, the Yeshiv's leaders, that a hostile arab majority or a large minority could not remain in place if a jewish state was to arise or safely endure, or, as Professor Morris retrospectively put it, quote, a removing of a population was needed. Without a population expulsion, a jewish state would not have been established. Unquote. The arab side rejected outright the partition resolution. I won't play games with that. I know a lot of people try to prove it's not true. It clearly, in my view, is true. The arab side rejected outright the partition resolution, while israeli leaders, acting on the compulsions inevitable and inbuilt into Zionism, found the pretext in the course of the first arab israeli war to expel the indigenous population and expand its borders. I therefore conclude that neither side was committed to the letter of the partition resolution, and both sides aborted it. Thank you, Norm. Norm asked that you make a lengthy statement in the beginning, Benny. I hope it's okay to call everybody by their first name in the name of camaraderie. Norm has quoted several things you said. Perhaps you can comment broadly on the question of 1948 and maybe respond to the things that Norm said. Yeah. Unskop, the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine, recommended partition. The majority of Unskop recommended partition, which was accepted by the UN General assembly in November 1947. Essentially looking back to the Peel commission in 1937. Ten years earlier, a british commission had looked at the problem of Palestine, the two warring national groups who refused to live together, if you like, or consolidate a unitary state between them. And Peel said there should be two states. That's the principle. The country must be partitioned into two states. This would give a modicum of justice to both sides, if not all their demands, of course. And the United nations followed suit. The United Nations, UNSCoP, and then the UN General assembly, representing the will of the international community, said two states is the just solution in this complex situation. The problem was that immediately with the passage of the resolution, the arab states and the Arabs of Palestine said no. As Norman Finkelstein said, they said no. They rejected the partition idea. The principle of partition. Not just the idea of what percentage, which side should get, but the principle of partition they said no to. The Jews should not have any part of Palestine for their sovereign territory. Maybe Jews could live as a minority in Palestine. That also was problematic in the eye of the palestinian arab leadership. Hosseini had said only Jews who were there before 1917 could actually get citizenship and continued to live there. But the Arabs rejected partition, and the Arabs of Palestine launched, in very disorganized fashion, war against the resolution, against the implementation of the resolution against the jewish community in Palestine, and their defeat in that civil war between the two communities while the British were withdrawing from Palestine, led to the arab invasion, the invasion by the arab states in May 1948, of the country, again, basically with the idea of eradicating or preventing the emergence of a jewish state in line with the United nations decision and the will of the international community. Norman said that the zionist enterprise, and he quoted me, meant from the beginning to transfer or expel the Arabs of Palestine, or some of the Arabs of Palestine. And I think he's sort of quoting out of context, the context in which the statements were made that the jewish state could only emerge if there was a transfer of arab population was preceded in the way I wrote it. And the way it actually happened by arab resistance and hostilities towards the jewish community. Had the Arabs accepted partition, there would have been a large arab minority in the jewish state which emerged in 47. And in fact, jewish economists and state builders took into account that there would be a large arab minority and its needs would be cared for, et cetera. But this was not to be because the Arabs attacked. And had they not attacked, perhaps a jewish state with a large arab minority could have emerged. But this didn't happen. They went to war. The Jews resisted. And in the course of that war, arab populations were driven out. Some were expelled, some left because arab leaders advised them to leave or ordered them to leave. And at the end of the war, Israel said they can't return because they just tried to destroy the jewish state. And that's the basic reality of what happened in 48. The Jews created a state. The Palestinian Arabs never bothered to even try to create a state before 48. And in the course of the 1948 war, and for that reason, they have no state. To this day, the Jews do have a state because they prepared to establish a state, fought for it, and established it, hopefully lastingly. When you say hostility, in case people are not familiar, there was a full on war where arab states invaded and Israel won that war. Let me just add, to clarify. The war had two parts to it. The first part was the arab community in Palestine. Its militiamen attacked the Jews from November 1947. In other words, from the day after the UN partition resolution was passed, arab gunmen were busy shooting up Jews, and that snowballed into a full scale civil war between the two communities in Palestine. In May 1948, a second stage began in the war in which the arab states invaded. The new state attacked the new state, and they too were defeated. And thus a state of Israel emerged. In the course of this two stage war, a vast palestinian refugee problem occurred. And so after that, the transfer, the expulsion, the thing that people call the Nakba, happened. Wein, could you speak to 1948 and the historical significance of it? Sure. There's a lot to unpack here. I'll try to limit myself to just a few points regarding Zionism and transfer. I think Chaim Weizmann, the head of the World Zionist Organization, had it exactly right when he said that the objective of Zionism is to make Palestine as jewish, as England is English or France is French. In other words, as, as Norman explained, a jewish state requires jewish political, demographic and territorial supremacy. Without those three elements, the state would be jewish in name only. And I think what distinguishes Zionism is its insistence, supremacy, and exclusivity that would be my first point. The second point is, I think what the soviet foreign minister at the time, Andrei Gromyko, said is exactly right, with one reservation. Gromyko was describing a european savagery unleashed against Europe's Jews. At the time, it wasn't Palestinians or Arabs. The savages and the barbarians were european to the core. It had nothing to do with developments in Palestine or the Middle east. Secondly, at the time that Gromyka was speaking, those jewish survivors of the Holocaust and others who were in need of safe haven were still overwhelmingly on the european continent and not on Palestine. Not in Palestine. And I think, given the scale of the savagery, I don't think that any one state or country should have borne the responsibility for addressing this crisis. I think it should have been an international responsibility. The Soviet Union could have contributed, Germany certainly could and should have contributed. The United Kingdom and the United States, which slammed their doors shut to the persecuted Jews of Europe as the Nazis were rising to power. They certainly should have played a role. But instead, what passed for the international community at the time decided to partition Palestine. And here I think we need to judge the partition resolution against the realities that obtained. At the time, two thirds of the population of Palestine was arab. The Yeshuv, the jewish community in Palestine, constituted about one third of the total population and controlled even less of the land within Palestine. As a preeminent palestinian historian, Walid al Khalidi has pointed out, the partition resolution in giving roughly 55% of Palestine to the jewish community, and I think 41. 42% to the arab community, to the Palestinians, did not preserve the position of each community or even favor one community at the expense of the others. Rather, it thoroughly inverted and revolutionized the relationship between the two communities. And as many have written, the Nakba was the inevitable consequence of partition. Given the nature of Zionism, given the territorial disposition, given the weakness of the palestinian community, whose leadership had been largely decimated during a major revolt at the end of the 1930s, given that the arab states were still very much under french and british influence, the Nakba was inevitable, the inevitable product of the partition resolution. And one last point also about the UN's partition resolution is, yes, formally, that is what the international community decided on the 29 November 1947. It's not a resolution that could ever have gotten through the UN General assembly today for a very simple reason. It was a very different general assembly. Most african, most asian states were not yet independent. Were the resolution to be placed before the international community today, and I find it telling that the minority opinion was led by India, Iran, and Yugoslavia. I think they would have represented the clear majority partition, given what we know about Zionism, given that it was entirely predictable, what would happen, given the realities on the ground in Palestine, was deeply unjust. And the idea that either the Palestinians or the arab states could have accepted such a resolution is, I think, an illusion. That was in 1947. We saw what happened in 48 and 49. Palestinian society was essentially destroyed. Over 80%, I believe, of Palestinians resident in the territory that became the state of Israel were either expelled or fled and ultimately were ethnically cleansed. Because ethnic cleansing consists of two components, not just forcing people into refuge or expelling them. It's just as importantly preventing their return. And here, and Benny Morris has written, I think, an article about Joseph Weitz and the transfer committees, there was a very detailed initiative to prevent the return, and it consisted of razing hundreds of palestinian villages to the ground, which was systematically implemented and so on. And so Palestinians became a stateless people. Now, what is the most important reason that no arab state was established in Palestine? Well, since the 1930s, the zionist leadership and the hashmite leadership of Jordan, as has been thoroughly researched and written about by the israeli british historian Avishleim, essentially colluded to prevent the establishment of an independent arab state in Palestine in the late 1940s. There's much more here, but I think those are the key points I would make about 1948. We may talk about Zionism, Britain, un assemblies, and all the things you mentioned. There's a lot to dig into again, if we can keep it to just one statement moving forward after. Steven, if you want to go a little longer. Also, we should acknowledge the fact that the speaking speeds of people here are different. Steven speaks about ten times faster than me. Steven, do you want to comment on 1948? Yeah, I think it's interesting where people choose to start the history. I notice a lot of people like to start at either 47 or 48, because it's the first time where they can clearly point to a catastrophe that occurs on the arab side, that they want to ascribe 100% of the blame to the newly emergent israeli state to. But I feel like when you have this type of reading of history, it feels like the goal is to moralize everything first, and then to pick and choose facts that kind of support the statements of your initial moral statement afterwards. Whenever people are talking about 48 or the establishment of the arab state, I never hear about the fact that a civil war started in 47 that was largely instigated because of the arab rejectionism of the 47 partition plan. I never hear about the fact that the majority of the land that was acquired happened by purchases from jewish organizations of Palestinian Arabs of the Ottoman Empire before the mandatory period in 1920 even started. Funnily enough, King Abdullah of Jordan was quoted as saying, the Arabs are as prodigal in selling their land as they are in weeping about it. I never hear about the multiple times that Arabs rejected partition, rejected living with Jews, rejected any sort of state that would have even had any sort of jewish exclusivity. It's funny because it was brought up before that the partition plan was unfair, and that's why the Arabs rejected it as though they rejected it, because it was unfair, because of the amount of land that Jews were given, and not just due to the fact that Jews were given land at all. As though a 30% partition or a 25% partition would have been accepted. When I don't think that was the reality of the circumstances. I feel like most of the other stuff has been said, but I noticed that whenever people talk about 48 or the years preceding 48, I think the worst thing that happens is there's a cherry picking of the facts where basically all of the blame is ascribed to this built in idea of Zionism, that because of a handful of quotes or because of an ideology, we can say that transfer or population expulsion or basically the mandate of all of these Arabs being kicked off the land was always going to happen. When I think there's a refusal sometimes as well, to acknowledge that regardless of the ideas of some of the zionist leaders, there is a political, social and military reality on the ground that they're forced to contend with. And unfortunately, the Arabs, because of their inability to engage in diplomacy and only to use tools of war to try to negotiate. Everything going on in mandatory Palestine basically always gave the Jews a reason or an excuse to fight and acquire land through that way, because of their refusal to negotiate on anything else, whether it was the partition plan in 47, whether it was the. The lusayan peace conference afterwards, where Israel even offered to annex Gaza in 51, where they offered to take in 100,000 refugees. Every single deal is just rejected out of hand because the Arabs don't want a jewish state anywhere in this region of the world. I would like to engage Professor Morris, if you don't mind. I'm not with the first name. It's just not my way of relating. You can just call me Morris. You don't need the professor. Okay. There's a real problem here, and it's been a problem I've had over many years of reading your work, apart perhaps from a grandchild, I suspect nobody knows your work better than I do. I've read it many times. Not once, not twice, at least three times. Everything you've written. And the problem is, it's a kind of quicksilver. Very hard to grasp a point and hold you to it. So we're going to try here to see whether we can hold you to a point. And then you argue with me. The point. I have no problem with that. Your name, please? Stephen Bonnell. Mister Bonnell referred to cherry picking and handful of quotes. Now, it's true that when you wrote your first book on the palestinian refugee question, you only had a few lines on this issue of transfer. Four pages. Yeah. In the first book. In the first book. Four pages, maybe four. You know, I'm not going to quarrel. My memory is not clear. We're talking about 40 years ago. I read it. I read it. But then I read other things about you. Okay. And you were taken to task, if my memory is correct, that you hadn't adequately documented the claims of transfer. Allow me to finish. And I thought that was a reasonable challenge, because it was an unusual claim for a mainstream israeli historian to say, as you did in that first book, that from the very beginning, transfer figured prominently in zionist thinking. That was an unusual. If you read Anita Shapiro, you read Shabtai Tevid. That was an unusual acknowledgement by you. And then I found it very impressive that in that revised version of your first book, you devoted 25 pages to copiously documenting the salience of transfer in zionist thinking. And in fact, you used a very provocative and resonant phrase. You said that transfer was inevitable, an inbuilt into Zionism. We're not talking about circumstantial factors, a war, arab hostility. You said, it's inevitable and inbuilt into Zionism. Now, as I said, so we won't be accused of cherry picking. Those were 25 very densely argued pages. And then in an interview, and I could cite several quotes, but I'll choose one, you said removing a population was needed. Let's look at the words. Without a population expulsion, a jewish state would not have been established. Now you're the one. Again, I was very surprised when I read your book here. I'm referring to righteous victims. I was very surprised when I came to that page 37 where you wrote that territorial displacement, dispossession was the chief motor of arab resistance to Zionism. Territorial displacement and dispossession were the chief motor of arab resistance to Zionism. So you then went on to say, because the arab population rationally feared territorial displacement and dispossession, it, of course, opposed Zionism. That's as normal as Native Americans opposing the euro American manifest destiny in the history of our own country because they understood it would be at their expense. It was inbuilt and inevitable. And so now for you to come along and say that it all happened just because of the war, that otherwise the Zionists made all these plans for a happy minority to live there, that simply does not gel. It does not cohere. It is not reconcilable with what you yourself have written. It was inevitable and inbuilt. Now, in other situations, you've said, that's true, but I think it was a greater good to establish a jewish state at the expense of the indigenous population. That's another kind of argument. That was Theodore Roosevelt's argument in our own country. He said, we don't want the whole of North America to remain a squalid refuge for these wigwams and teepees. We have to get rid of them and make this a great country. But he didn't deny that it was inbuilt and inevitable. I think you've made your point. First, I'll take up something that Moin said. He said that the Nakba was inevitable. As have you, and predictable. No, no, no. I've never said that. It was inevitable and predictable. Only because the Arabs assaulted the jewish community and state in 19, 47, 48. Had there been no assault, there probably wouldn't have been a refugee problem. There's no reason for a refugee problem to have occurred. Expulsions to have occurred. Dispossession, massive dispossession to occur. These occurred as a result of war. Now, Norman has said that I said that transfer was inbuilt into Zionism in one way or another, and this is certainly true. In order to buy land, the Jews bought tracts of land on which some Arabs sometimes lived. Sometimes they bought tracts of land on which there weren't arab villages. But sometimes they bought land on which there were Arabs. And according to ottoman law and the British, at least in the initial years of the british mandate, the law said that the people who bought the land could do what they liked with the people who didn't own the land, who were basically squatting on the land, which is the arab tenant farmers, which is, we're talking about a very small number, actually, of Arabs who were displaced as a result of land purchases in the ottoman period or the mandate period. But there was dispossession in one way. They didn't possess the land. They didn't own it, but they were removed from the land. And this did happen in Zionism. And there's, if you like, inevitability in zionist ideology of buying tracts of land and starting to work it yourself and settle it with your own people and so on. That made sense. But what we're really talking about is what happened in 4748. And in 47 48, the Arabs started a war. And actually, people pay for their mistakes. And the Palestinians have never actually agreed to pay for their mistakes. They make mistakes, they attack, they suffer as a result. And we see something similar going on today in the Gaza Strip. They do something terrible. They kill 1200 Jews, they abduct 250 women and children and babies and old people and whatever, and then they start screaming, please save us from what we did, because the Jews are counterattacking. And this is what happened then, and this is what's happening now. There's something fairly similar in the situation here, expulsion. And this is important, Norman, you should pay attention to this. You didn't raise that expulsion. Transfer whenever policy of the zionist movement before 47, it doesn't exist in zionist platforms. Of the various political parties, of the zionist organization, of the israeli state, of the jewish agency, nobody would have actually made it into policy because there was always a large minority. If there were people who wanted it, always a large minority of jewish politicians and leaders would have said, no, this is immoral. We cannot start a state on the basis of an expulsion. So it was never adopted and actually was never adopted as policy, even in 48, even though Ben Gurion wanted as few Arabs in the course of the war staying in the jewish state after they attacked it, he didn't want disloyal citizens staying there because they wouldn't have been loyal citizens. This made sense in the war itself, but the movement itself and its political parties never accepted it. It's true that in 1937, when the British, as part of the proposal by the Peel commission to divide the country into two states, one Arab, one Jewish, which the Arabs, of course, rejected, a Peel also recommended the Arabs. Most of the Arabs in the jewish state to be. Should be transferred, because otherwise, if they stayed and were disloyal to the emergent jewish state, this would cause endless disturbances, warfare, killing, and so on. So Ben Gurion and Weizmann latched onto this proposal by the most famous democracy in the world, the british democracy, when they proposed the idea of transfer side by side with the idea of partition, because it made sense. And they said well, if the British say so, we should also advocate it. But they never actually tried to pass it as zionist policy, and they fairly quickly stopped even talking about transfer after 1938. So just to clarify, what you're saying is that 47 was an offensive war, not a defensive war. By the Arabs? Yes, by the Arabs, yeah. And you're also saying that there was never a top down policy of expulsion. Yes. Just to clarify the point, if I. Understood you correctly, you're making the claim that transfer, expulsion and so on was in fact a very localized phenomenon resulting from individual land purchases. If I understand you correctly, you're also making the claim that the idea that a jewish state requires a removal or overwhelming reduction of the non jewish population. Was, if the Arabs are attacking you, yes. But let's say prior to 1947, it would be your claim that the idea that a significant reduction or wholesale removal of the arab population was not part of zionist thinking. Well, I think there's two problems with that. I think what you're saying about localized disputes is correct, but I also think that there is a whole literature that demonstrates that transfer was envisioned by zaidist leaders on a much broader scale than simply individual land purchases. In other words, it went way beyond, we need to remove these tenants so that we can farm this land. The idea was, we can't have a state where all these Arabs remain and we have to get rid of them. And the second, I think, impediment to that view is that long before the UN General assembly convened to address a question of Palestine, palestinian and arab and other leaders as well, had been warning, ad infinitum, that the purpose of the zionist movement is not just to establish a jewish state, but to establish an exclusivist jewish state. And that transfer, forced to spread a displacement, was fundamental to that project. And just responding to. Sorry, was it Steven Bonnell or Donald Bonnell? Yeah, with a b. Yeah. You made the point that the problem here is that people don't recognize, is that the first and last result for the Arabs is always war. I think theres a problem with that. I think you might do well to recall the 1936 general strike conducted by Palestinians at the beginning of the revolt, which at the time was the longest recorded general strike in history. You may want to consult the book published last year by Laurie, a history of false hope, which discusses in great detail the consistent engagement by Palestinians, their leaders, their elites, their diplomats, and so on with all these international committees. If we look at today, the Palestinians are once again going to the International Court of Justice. Theyre consistently trying to persuade the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to do his job, they have launched widespread boycott campaigns. So, of course, the Palestinians have engaged in military resistance. But I think the suggestion that this has always been their first and last resort and that they have somehow spurned civic action, spurned diplomacy, I think, really has no basis in reality. I'll respond to that. And then a question for Norm to take into account, I think, when he answers, Benny, because I am curious. Obviously, I have fresher eyes on this, and I'm a newcomer to this arena versus the three of you guys, for sure. A claim that gets brought up a lot has to do with the inevitability of transfer in Zionism, or the idea that as soon as the Jews envisioned a state in Palestine, they knew that it would involve some mass transfer of population, perhaps a mass expulsion. I'm sure we'll talk about plan Dalit or plan D at some point. The issue that I run into is, while you can find quotes from leaders, while you can find maybe desires expressed in diaries, I feel like it's hard to truly ever know if there would have been mass transfer in the face of arab peace, because I feel like every time there was a huge deal on the table that would have had a sizable jewish and arab population living together, the Arabs would reject it out of hand. So, for instance, when we say that transfer was inevitable, when we say that Zionists would have never accepted a sizable arab population, how do you explain the acceptance of the 47 partition plan that would have had a huge arab population living in the jewish state? Is your contention that after the acceptance of that, after the establishment of that state, that Jews would have slowly started to expel all of these arab citizens from their country? Or how do you explain that in Luzon, a couple years later, that Israel was willing to formally annex the Gaza Strip and make 200,000 or so people those citizens? But I'm just curious, how do we get this idea of Zionism always means mass transfer when there were times, at least early on in the history of Israel and a little bit before it, where Israel would have accepted a state that would have had a massive arab population in it? Yeah. Is your idea that they would have just slowly expelled them afterwards, or is. That question to me or norm here to either one. I'm just curious for the incorporation of the answer. Yeah, there is some misunderstandings here, so let's try to clarify that. Number one, it was the old historians who would point to the fact, in Professor Morris's terminology, the old historians, what he called not real historians. He called them chroniclers, not real historians. It was the old israeli historians who denied the centrality of transfer in zionist thinking. It was then Professor Morris who, contrary to Israel's historian establishment, who said, now you remind me, it's four pages. But it came at the end of the book. It was. No, no, it's at the beginning of the book. Transfer. Transfer is dealt with in four pages. At the beginning of my first book on the battles of the refugee problem. It's a fault of my memory, but the point still stands. It was Professor Morris who introduced this idea in what you might call a big way. Yeah, but I didn't say central to the science experiment. You're saying centrality. Okay. I never said it was central. I said it was there. Okay idea. It's. By the way, it's okay to respond back and forth. This is great. And also, just a quick question, if I may. You're using quotes from. From Benny, from Professor Morris. It's also okay to say those quotes do not reflect the full context of the. So, like, if we go back, you know, to quotes we've said in the past, and you both here have written, the three of you have written on this topic a lot, is we should be careful and just admit, like, well. Yeah, well, that's just real quick. Just to be clear, the contention is that norm is quoting a part and saying that this was the entire reason for this, whereas Benny's saying, it's a part of the. I'm not quoting a part. I'm quoting 25 pages, where Professor Morris was at great pains to document the claim that appeared in those early four pages of his book. Now, you say it never became part of the official zionist platform. It never became public policy. Fine. It wasn't policy. We're also asked, well, this is true. Why did that happen? Why did that happen? It's because it's a very simple fact, which everybody understands. Ideology doesn't operate in a vacuum. There are real world practical problems. You can't just take an ideology and superimpose it on a political reality and turn it into a fact. It was the british mandate. There was significant arab resistance to Zionism, and that resistance was based on the fact, as you said, the fear of territorial displacement and dispossession. So you couldn't very well expect the zionist movement to come out in neon lights and announce, hey, we're going to be expelling you the first chance we get. That's not realistic. Now, let me respond. Look, you've said it a number of times that the Arabs, from fairly early on in the conflict, from the 1890s, the early 19 hundreds, said, the Jews intend to expel us. This doesn't mean that it's true. It means that some Arabs said this, maybe believing it was true, maybe using it as a political instrument to gain support to mobilize Arabs against the zionist experiment. But the fact is, transfer did not occur before 1947. And Arabs later said then and since then have said that the Jews want to build a third temple on the Temple Mount, as if that's what really the mainstream of Zionism has always wanted and always strived for. But this is nonsense. It's something that Husseini used to use as a way to mobilize masses for the cause, using religion as the way to get them to join him. The fact that Arabs said that the Zionists wanted dispossess us doesn't mean it's true. It just means that there's some Arabs thought that maybe said it sincerely and maybe insincerely. Professor Morris later became a self fulfilling prophecy, this truth. Professor Morris. Arabs attacked the Jews. Professor Morris, I read through your stuff. Even yesterday. I was looking through righteous victims. You should read other things. You're wasting your time. No, no, actually, no, I do read other things, but I don't consider it a waste of time to read you. Not at all. You say that this wasn't inherent in Zionism. Now, would you all agree that Ben David, Ben Gurion was a Zionist? Major Zionist. Right. Would you agree Ryan Weitzman was a Zionist? Yeah. Okay. I believe they were. I believe they took their ideology seriously. It was the first generation, just like with the Bolsheviks, the first generation was committed to an idea. By the 1930s, it was just pure rail politik. The ideology went out the window. The first generation, I have no doubt about their convictions. Okay? They were Zionists. Transfer was inevitable and inbuilt in Zionism. You keep repeating. Because I have, as I said then, Mister Morris, I have a problem reconciling what you're saying. It either was incidental or it was deeply entrenched. Here I read it's deeply entrenched. Two very resonant words. Inevitable and inbuilt. Deeply entrenched. I never wrote. Well, I'm not sure it's something you inevitable and inbuilt. The idea of. Let me concede. Let me concede something. The idea of transfer was there. Israel Zangville, a british Zionist, talked about it early on in the century. Even Herzl in some way talked about transferring population. According to your 25 pages. Everybody talked about that. Well, that's like, we keep bringing up this line from the 25 pages and the four pages. You know, we're lucky to have Benny in front of us right now. We don't need to go to the quotes. Like, we can legitimately ask how central is expulsion to Zionism in its early version of Zionism, in whatever Zionism is today? And how much power, influence does Zionism and ideology have in Israel influence the philosophy, the ideology of Zionism have on Israel today? The zionist movement up to 1948, zionist ideology was central to the whole zionist experience, the whole enterprise up to 1948. And I think zionist ideology was also important in the first decades of Israel's existence. Slowly, the hold of Zionism, if you like, Bolshevism, held the Soviet Union gradually faded. And a lot of Israelis today think in terms of individual success and then the capitalism and all sorts of things which had nothing to do with Zionism. But Zionism was very important. But what I'm saying is that the idea of transfer wasn't the core of Zionism. The idea of Zionism was to save the Jews who had been vastly persecuted in eastern Europe and incidentally in the arab world, the muslim world, for centuries and eventually ending up with the Holocaust. The idea of Zionism was to save the jewish people by establishing a state or re establishing a jewish state on the ancient jewish homeland, which is something the Arabs today even deny, that there were Jews in Palestine or the land of Israel. 2000 years ago, Arafat famously said, what temple was there on Temple Mount? Maybe it was a nablus, which of course is nonsense, but they had a strong connection for thousands of years to the land to which they wanted to return and returned there. They found that on the land lived hundreds of thousands of Arabs and the question was how to accommodate the vision of a jewish state in Palestine alongside the existence of these arab masses living on, were indigenous, in fact, to the land by that stage. And the idea of partition, because they couldn't live together, because the Arabs didn't want to live together with the Jews. And I think the Jews also didn't want to live together in one state with Arabs in general. The idea of partition was the thing which the Zionists accepted. Okay, we can only get a small part of Palestine. The Arabs will get in 37 most of Palestine in 1947, ratios were changed, but we can live side by side with each other in a partitioned Palestine. And this was the essence of it. The idea of transfer was there, but it was never adopted as policy. But in 1947, to 48, the Arabs attacked, trying to destroy essentially the zionist enterprise and the emerging jewish state. And the reaction was transfer in some way, not as policy, but this is what happened on the battlefield. And this is also what Ben Gurion at some point began to want as well. Well, you know, one of the first books on this issue I read when I was still in high school, because my late father had, it was the diaries of Theodor Herzl. And I think, you know, Theodor Herzl, of course, was. Was the founder of the contemporary zionist movement. And I think if you read that, it's very clear for Herzl the model upon which the zionist movement would proceed. His model was Cecil Rhodes. His. I think, you know, Rhodes, from what I recall, correct me if I'm wrong, has quite a prominent place in Herzl's diaries. I think Herzl was also corresponding with him and seeking his support. Cecil Rhodes, of course, Washington was the british colonialist after whom the former white minority regime in Rhodesia was named. And Herzl also says explicitly in his diaries that it is essential to remove the existing population from Palestine. Can I respond to this in a moment, please? He says, we shall have to speak spirit the penniless population across the borders and procure employment for them elsewhere or something. And Israel Zangwill, who you mentioned, a land without a people. For a people without a land. They knew damn well it wasn't a people. A land without a people. I'll continue, but I'll. Please go ahead. There is one small diary entry in Herzl's vast. It's five volumes. Yeah, five volumes. There's one paragraph which actually mentions the idea of transfer. There are people who think that Herzl was actually pointing to South America when he was talking about that the Jews were going to move to Argentina and then they would try and buy out or buy off or spirit the penniless natives to make way for jewish settlement. Maybe he wasn't even talking about the Arabs in that particular passage. That's the argument of some people. Maybe he was. But the point is it has only 100th of a 1% of the diary which is devoted to the subject. It's not a central idea in Herzl's thinking, what Herzl wanted, and this is what's important, not Rhodes. I don't think he was the model. Herzl wanted to create a liberal, democratic, western state in Palestine for the Jews. That was the idea. Not some imperial enterprise serving some imperial master, which is what Rhodes was about. But to have a jewish state which was modeled on the western democracies in Palestine. And this, incidentally, was more or less what Weizmann and Ben Gurion. Ben Gurion wanted. Ben Gurion was more of a socialist. Weizmann was more of a liberal westerner. But they wanted to establish a social democratic or liberal state in Palestine. And they both envisioned, through most of the years of their activity that there would be an arab minority in that jewish state. It's true that Ben Gurion strived to have as small as possible an arab minority in the jewish state because he knew that if you want a jewish majority state, that would be necessary. But it's not something which they were willing to translate into actual policy. Just a quick pause to mention that for people who are not familiar, Theodor Herzl we're talking about over a century ago, and everything we've been talking about has been mostly 1948 and before. Yes, just one clarification on Herzl's diaries. I mean, the other thing that I recall from those diaries is he was very preoccupied with, in fact, getting great power, patronage, seeing Palestine, the jewish state in Palestine, I think his words an outpost of civilization against barbarism. In other words, very much seeing his project as a proxy for western imperialism in the Middle east. Not proxy. He wanted to establish a jewish state which would be independent. To get that, he hoped that he would be able to garner support from. Major imperial power, including the ottoman sultan, who he tried to cultivate. I just want to respond to point you made earlier, which was that people express their rejection of the partition resolution on the grounds that it gave the majority of Palestine to the jewish community, which formed only a third. Whereas, in fact, if I understood you correctly, you're saying the Palestinians and the Arabs would have rejected any partition resolution. A couple of things that, one, they would have rejected any. Two, a lot of that land given was in the Negev. It was pretty terrible land at the time. And three, the land that would have been partitioned to Jews, I think would have been. I think I saw it was like 500,000 Arabs. It would have been 500,000 Jews, 400,000 Arabs, and I think like 80,000 Bedouin would have been there. So the state would have been. I think you raise a valid point, because I think the Palestinians did reject the partition of their homeland in principle. And I think the fact that the United Nations General assembly then awarded the majority of their homeland to the zionist movement only added insult to injury. I mean, one doesnt have to sympathize with the Palestinians to recognize that they have now been a stateless people for 75 years. Can you name any country, yours, for example, or yours, that would be prepared to give 55%, 25%, 10% of your country to the Palestinians? Of course not. And so the issue was not the existence of Jews in Palestine. They had been there for centuries. And of course they had ties to Palestine, and particularly to Jerusalem and other places going back centuries, if not millennia. But the idea of establishing an exclusively jewish state at the expense of those who are already living there, I think it was right to reject that. And I don't think we can look back now, 75 years later and say, well, you should have accepted losing 55% of your homeland, because you ended up losing 78% of it, and the remaining 22% was occupied in 1967. That's not how things work. And I can imagine an american rejecting giving 10% of the United States to the Palestinians. And if that rejection leads to war and you lose half your country, I doubt that 50 years from now, you're going to say, well, maybe I should have accepted that. Sure. So I like this answer more than what I usually feel like I'm hearing when it comes to the palestinian rejection of the 40 separate petition plan. Because sometimes I feel like a weird switch happens to where the Arabs in the area are actually presented as entirely pragmatic people who are simply doing a calculation and saying, like, well, we're losing 55% of our land. Jews are only maybe one third of the people here, and we've got 45. And, nah, the math doesn't work, basically. But it wasn't a math problem. I think, like you said, it was. A matter of principle. It was an ideology problem. No, it was a matter of principle. Yeah. Ideologically driven, that they, as a people, have a right to or are entitled to this land, that they've never actually had an independent state on that they've never had even a guarantee of an independent state on that. They've never actually ruled a government. That last point is actually not correct, because for all its injustice, the mandate system recognized palestine as a class a mandate which provisionally recognized the independence of. That territory, of what would emerge from that territory, but not of the Palestinians. It was provisionally recognized, but the territory. Itself was, but not of the palestinian people. To have a right or a guarantee to a government that would have. It was a british mandate of Palestine, not the british mandate of Israel. The word exclusive, which you keep using is nonsense. The state which Ben Gurion envisioned would be a jewish majority state as they accepted the 1947 partition resolution. As Stephen said, that included 400,000 plus Arabs in a state which would have 500,000 Jews. So the idea of exclusivity wasn't anywhere in the air at all among the zionist leaders in 4748. They wanted a jewish majority state, but were willing to accept a state which had 40% Arabs. That's one point. The second thing is the Palestinians may have regarded the land of Palestine as their homeland, but so did the Jews. It was the homeland of the Jews as well. The problem was the Arabs were unable, and remain to this day, unable to recognize that for the Jews, that is their homeland as well. And the problem then is, how do you share this homeland either with one binational state or separate this partitioned into two states? The problem is that the Arabs have always rejected both of these ideas. The homeland belongs to the Jews, as Jews feel as much as it does for the Arabs. I would say for the Jews, it's the jewish people homeland. Real quick, I just want for both of you guys, because I haven't heard these questions answered. I really want these questions to be. I'm just so curious how to make sense of them. It was correctly brought up that I believe that Ben Gurion had. I think Shlomo Ben amid describes it as an obsession with getting validation or support from western states, Great Britain, and then a couple decades later, it becomes a Suez war. The Suzuki crisis. Yes, exactly correct. That was one of the major motivators, the idea to work with Britain and France on a military operation. Imperial stooge. But then the question again, I go back to if that is true, if Ben Gurion, if the early Israel saw themselves as a western fashioned nation, how could we possibly imagine that they would have engaged in the transfer of some 400,000 Arabs after accepting the partition plan? Would that not have completely and totally destroyed their legitimacy in the eyes of the entire western world? Would that not have been? How not? Well, first of all, I think that the zionist leadership's acceptance of the partition resolution, and I think you may have written about this, that they accepted it because it provided international endorsement of the legitimacy of the principle of jewish statehood, and they didn't accept the borders and in fact, later expanded the borders. Second of all, the borders were expanded in war. They accepted the UN partition resolution, borders. And all that's how they accepted. You can say that some of the Zionists, deep in their hearts, had the idea that maybe at some point, including their, they would be able to get. More, including their most senior leaders, who said so. And I think you've quoted them grudgingly. What the United nations, the world community, had said, this is what you're going to get. And second of all, I mean, removing dark people, darker people, Jews are as dark. It's intrinsic. It's intrinsic. It's intrinsic to western history. So the idea that Americans or Brits or the French would have an issue with. I mean, French had been doing it in Algeria for decades, the Americans have been doing it in North America for centuries. How would Israel forcibly displacing Palestinians somehow besmirch Israel in the eyes of the west? In the 1944 resolution of the Labour Party, and at the time, even Bertrand Russell was a member of the Labour party, it endorsed transfer of Arabs out of Palestine. As Moines pointed out, that was a deeply entrenched idea in western thinking, that there was nothing, it doesn't in any way contradict or violate or breach any moral values to displace the palestinian population. Now, I do believe there's a legitimate question. Had it been the case, as you said, Professor Morris, that the Zionists wanted to create a happy state with a jewish majority, but a large jewish minority, and if by virtue of immigration, like in our own country. In our own country, given the current trajectories, non whites will become the majority population in the United States quite soon, and according to democratic principles, we have to accept that. So if that were the case, I would say maybe there is an argument that had there been mass jewish immigration changed the demographic balance in Palestine, and therefore Jews became the majority. You can make an argument in the abstract that the indigenous arab population should have been accepting of that, just as whites in the United States, quote unquote, whites have to be accepting of the fact that the demographic majority is shifting to non whites in our own country. But that's not what Zionism was about. I did write my doctoral dissertation on Zionism, and I don't want to get now bogged down in abstract ideas. But as I suspect, you know, most theorists of nationalism say there are two kinds of nationalism. One is a nationalism based on citizenship. You become a citizen, you're integral to the country. That's sometimes called political nationalism. And then there's another kind of nationalism, and that says the state should not belong to its citizens, it should belong to an ethnic group. Each ethnic group should have its own state. It's usually called the german romantic idea of nationalism. Zionism is squarely in the german romantic idea. That was the whole point of Zionism. We don't want to be bundests and be one more ethnic minority in Russia. We don't want to become citizens and just become a jewish people in England, or friends. We want our own state, like the arab 23 states. No, wait, let's. Before we get to the Arabs, let's stick to the Jews for a moment, or the Zionists. We want our own state. And in that concept of wanting your own state, the minority at best lives on sufferance and at worst gets expelled. That's the logic of the german romantic zionist idea of a state. That's why they're Zionists. Now, I personally have shied away from using the word Zionism ever since I finished my doctoral dissertation, because that's painful, because, as I said, I don't believe it's the operative ideology today. It's like talking about Bolshevism and referring to Khrushchev. I doubt Khrushchev could have spelled Bolshevik, but for the period we're talking about, they were Zionists. They were committed to their exclusive state, with a minority living on sufferance or at worst, expelled. That was their ideology. And I really feel there's a problem with your happy vision of these western democrats like Weizmann. And they wanted to live peacefully with the Arabs. Weizmann described the expulsion in 1948 as, quote, the miraculous clearing of the land. That doesn't sound like somebody shedding too many tears at the loss of the indigenous population. Let me just. The unsufferance I don't agree with. I think that's wrong. The jewish state came into being in 1948. It had a population which was 20% Arab. When it came into being, after arab refugees, many of them had become refugees, but 20% remained in the country. 20% of Israel's population at inception in 1949 was arab. 80% went missing. No, no, no. We're talking about what remained in Palestine Israel after it was created. The 20% who lived in Israel received citizenship and all the rights of Israelis, except, of course, the right to serve an army, which they didn't want to. And they have supreme Court justices, they have Knesset members. They enjoyed basically for a period. Sure, they lived under emergency. No, no, wait a second. At the beginning. At the beginning, it's not fantasy. At the beginning, they received citizenship, could vote in elections for their own people, and they were put into parliament. But in the first years, the Israeli, the jewish majority, suspected that maybe the Arabs would be disloyal because they had just tried to destroy the jewish state. Then they dropped the military government and they became fully equal citizens. So if the whole idea was they must have a state without Arabs, this didn't happen in 49, and it didn't happen in the. Why did you say, Professor Morris? Yes. Then why did you say, without a population expulsion, a jewish state would not have been established? Because you're missing the first section of that paragraph, which was, they were being assaulted by the Arabs. And as a result, a jewish state could not have come into being unless there had also been an expulsion of the population, which was trying to kill people. Norm, I'm officially forbidding you referencing that again. Hold on a second. Wait. We responded to it. So the main point you're making, we have to take Benietta's word is like, there was a war, and that's the reason why he made that statement. I think just one last point on this. I remember reading your book when it first came out and reading one incident after the other and one example after the other, and then getting to the conclusion where you said the Nakba was a product of war, not design. I think, and I remember reacting almost in shock to that, that I felt you had mobilized overwhelming evidence that it was a product of design, not war. And I think our discussion today very much reflects, let's say, the dissonance between the evidence and the conclusion. Feel that the research that you have conducted and published demonstrates that it was, in fact, inherent and inbuilt and inevitable. And I think the point that Norm and I are making is that your own historical research, together with that of others, indisputably demonstrates that it does. I think that's a fundamental disagreement we're having here. Can I actually respond to that? Because this is actually. I think this is emblematic of the entire conversation. I watched a lot of Norm's interviews and conversations in preparation for this. And I hear normals say this all over and over and over again. I only deal in facts. I don't deal in hypotheticals. I only deal in facts. I only deal in facts. And that seems to be the case, except for when the facts are completely and totally contrary to the particular point you're trying to push. The idea that Jews would have out of hand, rejected any state that had Arabs on it, or always had a plan of expulsion is just betrayed by the acceptance of the 47 partition. I don't think you understand politics. Did I just say that? There is a chasm that separates your ideology from the limits and constraints imposed by politics and reality. Now, Professor Morris, I suspect, would agree that the zionist movement, from fairly early on, was committed to the idea of a jewish state. I am aware of only one major study probably written 40 years ago, the binational idea in Mandatory Palestine by a woman. I forgot her name. Now. You remember her? I'm trying to, yeah. Okay. Would you know the book? I think so, yeah. She is the only one who tried to persuasively argue that the zionist movement was actually not formally, actually committed to a binational idea. But most historians of the subject agree the zionist movement was committed to the idea of a jewish state. Having written my doctoral dissertation on the topic, I was confirmed in that idea because Professor Chomsky, who was my closest friend for about 40 years, was very committed to the idea that binationalism was the dominant trend in Zionism. I could not agree with. I couldn't go with him there. But, Professor Morris, you are aware that until the Biltmore resolution in 1942, the zionist movement never declared it was for a jewish state. Why? Because it was politically impossible at the moment. Until 1942. There is your ideology, there are your convictions, there are your operative plans, and there's also, separately, what you say in public. The zionist movement couldn't say in public, we're expelling all the Arabs. They can't say that. And they couldn't even say, we support a jewish state until 1942. You're conflating two things. The Zionists wanted a jewish state. Correct. That didn't mean that. The expulsion of the Arabs. It's not the same thing. They wanted a jewish state with a jewish majority, but they were willing, as it turned out, both in 37 and in 47, and subsequently, to have an arab minority, a large arab minority. They were willing to have a large arab minority in the country, and they ended up with a large arab minority in the country, 20% of the population. In 49. They ended up for about five minutes before they were expelled. They agreed to win 47, and then they were gone by March 1949. What happened in between the rejection of the partition plan and the expulsion of the Arabs? The Arabs launched the war. Well, yeah. Well, I mean, like, it's not. It wasn't random. Like, there's a potential that wasn't random. There was totally agree with that. Yeah. It was by design. You can say that. You can say that. But in this case, the facts betray you. There was no arab acceptance of anything that would have allowed for a jewish state to exist. Of course, number one. And number two, I think that it's entirely possible, given how things happen after war, that this exact same conflict could have played out and an expulsion would have happened without any ideology at play, that there was a people that disagreed on, who had territorial rights to a land there was a massive war afterwards, and then a bunch of their friends invaded after to reinforce the idea that the jewish people in this case couldn't have a state. There could have been a transfer regardless. Anything could have been. But that's not what history is about. History is about palestinian rejection. It's up to any peace deal. As I said over and over and over, when the wall was thrown into the court of the United nations, they were faced with a practical problem. And I, for 01:00 a.m. not going to try to adjudicate the rights and wrongs from the beginning. I do not believe that if territorial displacement and dispossession was inherent in the zionist project, I do not believe it can be a legitimate political enterprise. Now, you might say that's speaking from 2022 or 2020, okay? But we have to recognize that from nearly the beginning, for perfectly obvious reasons, having nothing to do with anti semitism, anti westernism, anti Europeanism, but because no people that I am aware of would voluntarily cede its country. If you can perfectly understand native american resistance to eurocolonialism, you can perfectly well understand it without any anti Europeanism, anti whiteism, anti Christianism. They didn't want to cede their country to invaders. That's completely understandable. You're minimizing the anti semitic element you minimize in arab nationalism. In all your books. You minimize. No, no, no. Husseini was an anti semite. The leader of the palestinian national movement in the thirties and forties was an anti semite. This was one of the things which drove him and also drove him in the end to work in Berlin for Hitler for four years with Nazi. Giving nazi propaganda to the arab world, calling on the Arabs to murder the Jews. That's what he did in World War two. That's the leader of the palestinian arab national movement. And he wasn't alone. He wasn't alone. Why is it that you read your book righteous victims? You can read it and read it and read it and read it as I have. You will find barely a word about the Arabs being motivated by antisemitism. It exists, though. Even I didn't say it doesn't exist. You agree that it exists? Hey, I don't know a single non jew who doesn't harbor anti semitic. We're talking about Arabs now. Yeah, but I don't know anybody. That's just part of the human condition. Antisemitism. Husseini was a fourth and among the Arabs. Professor Morris, here's my problem. I didn't see that in your righteous victims. Even when you talked about the first intifada, and you talked about the second intifada, and you talked about how there was a lot of influence by Hamas, the islamic movement. You even stated that there is a lot of anti semitism in those movements. But then you went on to say, but of course, at bottom, it was about the occupation. It wasn't about. And I've read it. Yeah, yeah, but you're moving from different. No, I'm not moving across the ages. It was about your whole book. The occupation began in 67, the one you were talking about. I looked and looked and looked for evidence of this anti semitism as being a chief motor of arab resistance to Zionism. I didn't see it. You like, did he make that claim? I don't remember the word chief. It's. It's one of the elements. Very binary. Binary? Yes, binary. Please don't give me this postmodernism binary. You're the one, but you are thinking in terms of. You're the one that said, do you have your book here? Talk about page 137 37. You're talking in black and white concepts when history is much grayer. Lots of things happened because of lots of reasons, not one or the other. And you don't seem to see that. Can I ask you, because it's for them to talk to. A very quick question. What do you think the ideal solution was on the arab side from 47? What would they have preferred and what would have happened if. And then the second one, what would have happened if Jews would have lost the war in 48? What do you think would have happened to the israeli population or jewish population? I think the Palestinians and the Arabs were explicit that they wanted a unitary, I think, federal state. And they made their submissions to unscop. They made their appeals at the UN General assembly. What do you mean by unitarian federal? I don't get that. They wanted an arab state. They wanted Palestine to be an arab state. Yes, yes. Unitary federal. They wanted Palestine as an arab and exclusively arab state. No, wasn't an exclusively arab state. I think we have to distinguish between palestinian and arab opposition to a jewish state in Palestine on the one hand, and palestinian and arab attitudes to jewish existence in Palestine. There's a fundamental difference. The leader of the movement said that all the Jews who had come since 1917, and that's the. The majority of the Jews in Palestine in 1947 shouldn't be there. They shouldn't be citizens, and he shouldn't be there. He did say that. I'm not going to deny it. It's true. I can understand the sentiment, but I think it's wrong. But also, you guys. I want to. Tell you guys earlier, because you used the words earlier, that it was supremacy and exclusivity that the Zionists. Well, I want to answer your question, as you, Husseini, did say that, and I'm sure there was a very substantial body of palestinian arab public opinion that endorsed that. But by the same token, I think a unitary arab state, as you call it, or a palestinian state, could have been established with arrangements, with guarantees to ensure the security and rights of both communities. How that would work in detail had, had been discussed and proposed, but never resolved. And again, I think jewish fears about. What would have been a second Holocaust. Well, no, that was the jewish fear. A second holocaust. That may well have been the jewish fear. It was an unfounded jewish fear. It was unfounded. Of course it was unfounded. What about, like in 48 and 46? You really think I, that the Palestinians, had they won the war, were going to import ovens and crematoria in Germany? And there were pogroms across, in almost every single arab state where there were Jews living after 48, after 56, after 67, there were always pogroms. There were always flights from Jews from those countries to Israel afterwards. I dont think it would be. I wouldnt say there were always pogroms in every arab state. I think there was flight of Arab Jews for multiple reasons, in some cases for precisely the reasons you say. If you look at the jewish community in Algeria, for example, their flight had virtually nothing to do with the arab israeli conflict. The issue of Algerian Jews was that the French gave them citizenship during their colonial rule of Algeria, and they increasingly became identified with french rule. And when Algeria became independent and all the French ended up leaving out of fear or out of disappointment or out of whatever, the Jews were identified as french rather than algerian. This is a bit of a red herring. There were pogroms in the arab countries. In Bahrain, even, where there's almost no Jews. There was a pogrom in 1947. There was a pogrom in Aleppo in 1947. I'm not denying any of that history. Killings of Jews in Iraq and Egypt in 19, 48, 49. I'm not saying it. So the Jews basically fled the arab states, not for multiple reasons. They fled because they felt that the governments there and the societies amid which they had lived for hundreds of years no longer wanted them. Look, without getting into the details, I think we can both agree that ultimately a clear majority of Arab Jews who believed that after having lived in these countries for centuries, for centuries, for centuries in Iraq, for centuries, if not millennia, came to the unfortunate conclusion that their situation had become untenable. Yes. I also think that we can both agree that this had never been an issue prior to Zionism and the emergence of the state of Israel. Looks didn't begin with Zionism in the arab world. The issue is the point I raised, which is whether these communities had ever come to a collective conclusion that their position had become untenable in this part of the world. No, they were Arab Jews. Well, because untenable meant there was no alternative. But with the creation of Israel, there was an alternative. Right? A place where they could go and not be discriminated against or live as second class citizens, or be subject to arab majority states. I also think it's interesting that when you analyze the flight of jewish people, and I've seen this, that it wasn't just, I agree with you, it wasn't just a mass expulsion from all the arab states. There were definitely push factors. There were also pull factors. Now, I don't know how you guys feel about the nakba, but when the analysis of the Nakba comes in again, it's back to that. Well, that was actually just a top down expulsion. The retreat of wealthy arab people in the thirties didn't matter. Any of the messaging from the surrounding arab states didn't matter. And expulsion from jewish people or people running from their lives from jewish massacres, again, it's like that. I feel like it's that selective. It's a selective, critical analysis of the. Term Jewish here, because it wasn't the, you know, the Jews of England or the Soviet. I say Jewish because prior to 48, the Yeshua. I think we should, I think it's useful to say, refer to Zionists before 1948 and Israelis after 48. We don't need to implicate. Well, sure, but the jewish people that were being attacked in arab states weren't Zionists. They were just Jews living there. Can you just comment on that? I was rereading Shlomo ben Amis last book, and he does at the end discuss at some length the whole issue of the refugee question bearing on the so called peace process and on the question of 48 and the arab emigration, if you allow me. Let me just quote him. Israel is particularly fond of the awkwardly false symmetry she makes between the palestinian refugee crisis and the forced emigration of 600,000 Jews from arab countries following the creation of the state of Israel, as if it were an unplanned exchange of populations. And then, Mister Ben Ami, for those of you who are listening. He was Israel's former foreign minister, and he's an influential historian in his own right. He says, in fact, envoys from the Mossad and a jewish agency worked underground in arab countries and Iran to encourage Jews to go to Israel. More importantly, for many Jews in arab states, the very possibility of emigrating to Israel was the culmination of millennial aspirations. It represented the consummation of a dream to take part in Israel's resurgence as a nation. So this idea that they were all expelled after 1948, that's one area. Professor Moritz, I defer to expertise. That's one of my credos in life. I don't know the israeli literature, but as it's been translated in English, there is very little solid scholarship on what happened in 1948 in the arab countries and which caused the Jews to leave. Arab Jews. Arab Jews. Right. But Shlomo ben Ami knows the literature. He knows the scholarship. He's a historian. Pangiris. Yes. From Morocco. Right. So he knows from Iraq, is written on this issue. And they wrote that the Jews in the arab lands were not pro Zionists. They weren't Zionists at all. Certainly Avishlime's family was anti zionist. And Avishleim, when he was interviewed by Mehran Rappaport on this question, he said, you simply cannot say that the Iraqi Jews were expelled. It's just not true. And he was speaking as an iraqi jew who left with his father family in 1948. They were pushed out. They weren't expelled. That's probably the right phrase. I think it's more complex than that. I think it was. Sorry I interrupted. No, you're not interrupting me, because I don't know. I only know what's been translated into English. And the english literature on the subject is very small and not scholarly. Now, there may be an hebrew literature, I don't know, but I was surprised that even Shlomo ben Ami, a stalwart of his state. Fair enough. On this particular point, he called it false symmetry. No, no, Stephen is right. There was a pull and a push mechanism in the departure of the Jews from the arab lands post 48. But there was also a lot of push. A lot of push. That's indisputable. There was. And on the point of agreement on this one brief light of agreement, let us wrap up with this topic of history and move on to modern day. But before that, I'm wondering if we can just say a couple of last words on this topic. Stephen? Yeah. I think that when you look at the behaviors of both parties, in the time period around 48, or especially 48 and earlier, there's this assumption that there was this huge built in mechanism of Zionism and that it was going to be inevitable. From the inception of the first zionist thought, I guess that appeared in Herzl's mind, that there would be a mass, violent population transfer of arab Palestinians out of what would become the israeli state. I understand that there are some quotes that we can find that maybe seem to possibly support an idea that looks close to that. But I think when you actually consult the record of what happened, when you look at the populations, the massive populations that Israel was willing to accept within what would become their state borders, their nation borders, I just don't think that the historical record agrees with the idea that Zionists would have just never been okay living alongside arab Palestinians. But when you look at the other side, Arabs would out of hand, reject literally any deal that apportioned any amount of that land for any state relating to jewish people or the israeli people. I think it was said, even on the other end of the table, that Arab Palestinians would have never accepted. The Arabs would have never accepted any jewish state whatsoever. So it's interesting that on the ideology part, where it's claimed that Zionists are people of exclusion and supremacy and expulsion, we can find that in diary entries, but we can find that expressed in very real terms on the arab side. I think in all of their behavior around 48 and earlier, where the goal was the destruction of the israeli state, it would have been the dispossession of many jewish people. It probably would have been the expulsion of a lot of them back to Europe. And I think that very clearly plays out in the difference between the actions of the Arabs versus some diary entries of some jewish leaders. Benny, one thing which stood out, and I think Moin made this point, is that the Arabs had nothing to do with the Holocaust. But then the world community forced the Arabs to pay the price for the Holocaust. That's the traditional arab argument. This is slightly distorting the reality. The Arabs in the 1930s did their utmost to prevent jewish emigration from Europe and reaching Palestine, which was the only safe haven available, because America, Britain, France, nobody wanted Jews anywhere, and they were being persecuted in central Europe and eventually would be massacred in large numbers. So the arab effort to pressure the British to prevent Jews reaching Palestine's safe shores contributed indirectly to the slaughter of many Jews in Europe, because they couldn't get to anywhere and they couldn't get to Palestine because the Arabs were busy attacking Jews in Palestine and attacking the British to make sure they didn't allow Jews to reach this safe haven. That's important. The second thing is, of course, there's no point in belittling the fact that the arab, palestinian arab national movements leader Hosseini worked for the Nazis in the 1940s. He got a salary from the german foreign ministry. He raised troops among Muslims in Bosnia for the SS. And he broadcast to the arab world calling for the murder of the Jews in the Middle east. This is what he did. And the Arabs since then have been trying to whitewash Hosseinis role. Im not saying he was the instigator of the Holocaust, but he helped the Germans along in doing what they were doing and supported them in doing that. So this cant be removed from the fact that the Arabs, as you say, paid a price for the Holocaust, but they also participated in various ways in helping it happen. Right. I'll make two points. The first is you mentioned Hajimeen al Hosseini and his collaboration with the Nazis. Entirely legitimate point to raise. But I think one can also say definitively, had haj, I mean, al Husseini never existed, the Holocaust would have played out precisely as it did. As far as palestinian opposition to jewish immigration to Palestine during the 1930s is concerned, it was of a different character than, for example, british and american rejection of jewish immigration. They just didn't want Jews on their soil. Objectively, it helped the Germans kill the Jews. In the palestinian case, their opposition to jewish immigration was to prevent the transformation of their homeland into a jewish state that would dispossess them. And I think that's an important distinction to make. The other point I wanted to make is we've spent the past several hours talking about Zionism transfer and so on. But I think there's a more fundamental aspect to this, which is that Zionism, I think, would have emerged and disappeared as yet one more utopian political project had it not been for the British what the preeminent palestinian historian Walid Khalidi has termed the british shield, because I think without the british sponsorship, we wouldn't be having this discussion today. The British sponsored Zionism for a very simple reason, which is that during World War one, the ottoman armies attempted to march on the Suez Canal. Suez Canal was the jugular vein of the British Empire between Europe and India. And the British came to the conclusion that they needed to secure the Suez Canal from any threat. And as the British have done so often in so many places, how do you deal with this? Well, you bring in a foreign minority, implant them amongst a hostile population, and establish a protectorate over them. I don't think a jewish state in Palestine had been part of british intentions. And the Balfour declaration very specifically speaks about a jewish national home in Palestine. In other words, a british protectorate. Things ended up taking a different course. And I think the most important development was World War two. And I think this had maybe less to do with the Holocaust and more to do with the effective bankruptcy of the United Kingdom during that war and its inability to sustain its global empire. It ended up giving up India, ended up giving up Palestine and its. In that context, I think that we need to see the emergence of a jewish state in Palestine. And again, a jewish state means a state in which the jewish community enjoys not only a demographic majority, but an uncontestable demographic majority, an uncontestable territorial hegemony, and an uncontestable political supremacy. And that is also why, after 1948, the nascent israeli state confiscated, I believe, up to 90% of lands that had been previously owned by Palestinians who became citizens of Israel. It is why the new israeli state imposed a military government on its population of palestinian citizens between 1948 and 1966. It is why the israeli state effectively reduced the Palestinians living within the israeli state as citizens of the israeli state to second class citizens, on the one hand, promoting jewish nationalism and jewish nationalist parties, on the other hand, doing everything within its power to suppress and eliminate palestinian or arab nationalist movements. And that's why today there's a consensus among all major human rights organizations that Israel is an apartheid state. What the israeli human rights organization Bet Selim describes a regime of jewish supremacy between the river and the sea. You're really tempting a response from the other side. On the last few sentences, we'll talk about the claims of apartheid and so on. It's a fascinating discussion. We need to have it norm on. The question of the responsibility of the Palestinian Arabs for the Nazi Holocaust. Direct or indirect. I consider that an absurd claim. As Gromyko said, and I quoted him, the entire western world turned its back on the Jews. To somehow focus on the Palestinians strikes me as completely ridiculous. Number two, as Mooween said, there's a perfectly understandable reason why palestinian Arabs wouldn't want Jews. Because in their minds, and not irrationally, these Jews intended to create a jewish state which would quite likely have resulted in their expulsion. I'm a very generous person. I've actually taken in a homeless person for two and a half years. But if I knew in advance that that homeless person was going to try to turn me out of my apartment, I would think 10,000 times before I took him in. Okay. As far as the actual complicity of the Palestinian Arabs, if you look at Raoul Hilberg's three volume classic work, the destruction of the european Jewry, he has in those thousand plus pages one sentence, one sentence on the role of the mufti of Jerusalem. And that, I think is probably an overstatement, but we'll leave it aside. The only two points I would make aside from the Holocaust point is, number one, I do think the transfer discussion is useful because it indicates that there was a rational reason behind the arab resistance to jewish or zionist immigration to Palestine, the fear of territorial displacement and dispossession. And number two, there are two issues. One is the history, and the second is being responsible for your words. Now, some people accuse me of speaking very slowly, and they're advised on YouTube to turn up the speed twice to three times whenever I'm on. One of the reasons I speak slowly is because I attach value to every word I say. And it is discomforting, disorienting where you have a person who produced a voluminous corpus, rich in insight and rich in archival sources, who seems to disown each and every word that you pluck from that corpus by claiming that it's either out of context or it's cherry picking. Words count. And I agree with lex. Everybody has the right to rescind what they've said in the past. But what you cannot claim is that you didn't say what you said. I'll stick to the history, not the current propaganda. 1917 the British the Zionist movement began way before. The British supported the zionist movement for decades. In 1917, the British jumped in and issued the Balfour Declaration, supporting the emergence of a jewish national home in Palestine, which most people understood to mean eventual jewish statehood in Palestine. Most people understood that in Britain and among the Zionists and among the Arabs. But the British declared the Balfour Declaration, or issued the Balfour Declaration not only because of imperial self interest, and this is what you're basically saying, they had imperial interests, a buffer state which would protect the Suez Canal from the east. The British also were motivated by idealism. And this, incidentally, is how Balfour described the reasoning behind issuing the declaration. And he said, the western world, western Christendom owes the Jews a great debt, both for giving the world and the west, if you like, social values as embodied in the Bible, social justice and all sorts of other things. And the christian world owes the Jews because it persecuted them for 2000 years. This debt we're now beginning to repay with the 1917 declaration favoring Zionism. But it's also worth remembering that the Jews weren't proxies or attached to the british imperial endeavor. They were happy to receive british support in 1917 and then subsequently when the British ruled Palestine for 2030 years. But they weren't part of the british imperial design or mission. They wanted a state for themselves. The Jews happy to have the British support them, happy today to have the Americans support Israel, but its not because were stooges or extensions of american imperial interests. The British, incidentally, always described in arab narratives or propaganda as consistent supporters of Zionism. They werent the first british rulers in Palestine, 1917 1920. Herbert Samuel, no, before Herbert Samuel. Samuel came in 1920. The British ruled there for three years previously and most of the leaders, the british generals and so on, who were in Palestine were anti zionist. And subsequently, in the twenties and thirties, the British occasionally curbed zionist immigration to Palestine and in 1939 switched horses and supported the arab national movement and not Zionism. They turned anti zionist and basically said, you Arabs will rule Palestine within the next ten years. This is what we're giving you by limiting jewish immigration to Palestine. But the Arabs didnt actually understand what they were being given on a silver platter. Husseini again. And he said, no, no, we cant accept the british white paper of May 1939, which had given the Arabs everything they wanted, basically self determination in an arab majority state. So what Im saying is the British at some point did support the zionist enterprise, but at other points were less consistent in the support. And in 1939, until 1948, when they didn't vote even for partition for jewish statehood in Palestine in the UN resolution, they didn't support Zionism during the last decade of the mandate. It's worth remembering that. I'd like to respond to that. I mean, speaking of propaganda, I find it simply impossible to accept that Balfour, who as british prime minister in 1905 was the chief sponsor of the Aliens act, which was specifically, he changed his mind, which was specifically designed to keep persecuted eastern european Jews out of the streets of the UK, and who was denounced as an anti semite by the entire british jewish establishment a decade later, all of a sudden changed his mind. People change their minds. But when the changing of the mind just coincidentally happens to coincide with the british imperial interest, I think perhaps the transformation is a little more superficial than he's being given credit for. It was clearly a british imperial venture. And if there had been no threat to the Suez Canal during World War one, regardless of what Balfour would have thought about the Jews and their contribution to history and their persecution and so on, there would have been no Balfour there. Can I ask real quick a question on that? Why did the British ever cap immigration then from Jews to that area at all? Well, we're talking now about 20. Sure. But I'm saying that if the whole goal was just to be an imperialist project, there were terrorist attacks from jewish. Yes, but I'll answer. Yeah, in the forties. Yeah. And we're talking now about 1917. And as I mentioned earlier, I don't think the British had a jewish state in mind. That's why they used the term jewish national home. I think what they wanted was a british protectorate loyal to and dependent upon the British. I think an outstanding review of british policy towards these issues during the mandate has been done by Martin Bunton of the University of Victoria. And he basically makes the argument that once the British realized the mess they were in, certainly by the late twenties, early thirties, they recognized the mess they were in, the irreconcilable differences, and basically pursued a policy of just muddling on and muddling on in the context of british rule in Palestine, whose overall purpose was to serve for the development of zionist institutions, yeshuvas economy and so on meant even if the British were not self consciously doing this, preparing the groundwork for the eventual establishment of a jewish state. I don't know if that answers your. Question, except they did turn anti zionist in 1939. Yes, of course, they were being shot off by zionist. No, no, before they were being shot off, but maintained that anti zionist posture until 1948. Okay. And if I may just also one point. You mentioned Hajimeen al Hosseini during world. Entirely legitimate. But what I would also point, point out is that you had a zionist organization, the Leahy. 300 people. 300 people. One of whom happened to become an israeli prime minister, an israeli foreign minister, a speaker of israeli parliament. Maybe you should give his name. Yitzhak Shamir, proposing an alliance with Nazi Germany in 1941. Well, no, the Leahy proposed some people. In the Lehi propose, of which Amir was a prominent leader. He's a red herring also. No, no. Okay, well, if he's a red herring, I'm sorry. The leche was an unimportant organization. In the Yishuv, 300 people versus 30,000 belonged to the Haganah. So it was not a very important organization. It's true. Before the Holocaust actually began, they wanted allies against the British where they could. 19, 30 41. From what I recall, 1940, they were. They approached the german emissary in Istanbul or something. Yes. And if I may, proposed an alliance with Nazi Germany. On what the Leahy described as on the basis of shared ideological. Shared ideological principles. Well, they said they did. Why are you doing these things? The lexicons reviled. But you know, you know what the statement said on the basis of a shared ideology. Why do you say no? You think you can wait? The Leche people were Nazis. Is that your sin? No. Are you saying that. Forget statements. You like to quote things, but were they? Were they Nazis? Were the lehi Nazis? That's what I'm asking. What did he say? Some of them supported Stalin. He's saying that the basis of the pact was their agreement on ideology. There wasn't any pact. They suggested, I suppose they proposed an agreement. And what did the agreement say? They wanted arms against the British. That's what they wanted. Well, that's what Hajime al Husseini wanted also. That's what. No, no, but others didn't work in Berlin helping the nazi regime. That's what the IRA wanted also. No, but this is what Khatjamin Ali Husseini did. You know that he was an anti semite? You've probably read some of his works. It wasn't just anti british. He was also anti semitic. They had a common ground with Hitler. I think we can agree every anti. Semite is a Hitlerite. I think we. He literally worked with the Nazis to recruit people. He wasn't just the guy posting. And he was an absolutely revolting, disgusting human being. There's something happen here. But the problem is you're saying that Usaini was his influence. You're saying the movement. But I don't even understand. Of all the crimes you want to ascribe to the palestinian people, trying to blame them directly. Indirectly. Indirectly or indirectly, three times. The move for the Nazi Holocaust is completely lunatic. Speaker one, hold on the way. There's not a. He's not blaming them for the Holocaust. He's saying that from the perspective. No, he's saying that from the perspective of Jews in the region, Palestinians would have been part of the reason. That is exactly. You have not read what he said. I've read him. You never understand him. Believe, believe me, I'm a lot more literate than you, Mister Barack. I wouldn't believe the guy that wrote the book. You read Wikipedia? That's great Hebrew. And you call yourself an israeli historian. We're all here on different grounds. I just want. If I can just respond. Well, no, I'm just saying that there were two. There were two tricks. That's fine. There were two tricks that are being played here that I think is interesting one is you guys claim that the Leahy was trying to forge an alliance with Nazi Germany because of a shared ideology. That's what they said. Yeah, but hold on. No, no, no. Wait. No, no. It's about what you said. You brought that up to imply that Zionism must be inexorably linked. I'm sorry. No, you're putting words in my mouth. Okay, wait. Well, then what was the purpose of saying that? The Lehi claimed that they, the Lehi, who were a small group of people that were reviled by many in Israel. Not many. By everybody, practically. They were called terrorists. The zionist movement called them terrorists? Yes, and hunted them. Called himself a terrorist. They were so irrelevant that their leader ended up being kicked upstairs to the leader of the israeli parliament. That's israeli parliament. To the israeli years hence, to israeli foreign minister. And begin was also. Yes. You want to characterize him as irrelevant as well? Go ahead. No, characterizing him as irrelevant based on what happens decades later. The timeline matters. Well, the question is, what is the point of saying that the leahy tried to forge an alone? It's bringing God, the mufti of Jerusalem, and trying to blame the Holocaust. The mufti was the leader of the Palestine Arab national movement, the wah. He was 300. And he had as much to do with the Nazi Holocaust as I did. No, he recruited people for their assists. How can you get away from that? No, he recruited people for their assists. He recruited soldiers in the Balkans, mostly Kosovars, which was disgusting. I have no doubt about that. But he had one foreign minister saying. Don'T let the Jews out. Receive letters from Husseini during the Holocaust. During the Holocaust. Don't let the Jews out. Don't let the Jews out. I'm not saying he was a major. Architect of the holy minor, but if we're agreed. If we're agreed that Haj Amin al Husseini, the mufti of Jerusalem, collaborated with the Nazis during World War two and actively sought their sponsorship. Why is it irrelevant and probably wanted. The destruction of european jewry. He probably wanted a lot of things. Okay. Okay. If that's relevant, why is it irrelevant that a prime minister of Israel. Not prime minister. In 1941, he wasn't prime minister of Israel. He was a leader of a very small terrorist groups. So do you consider, do you consider it irrelevant that many years ago Mahmoud Abbas wrote a doctoral thesis which is basically time to mount about Mahmoud Abbas? Okay, but, but I don't. But didn't bring it up. You're the one who's bringing it up. Belittling the Holocaust. That's what you're saying. The president of the Palestinian National Authority belittled the Holocaust and it didn't happen, or only a few jews died. I think that's a fair characterization of. But I didn't bring it up. I brought it up. Yeah. Okay. Because my question is then why is Shamir's antecedency relevant? He was a terrorist leader of a very small, marginal group. Who would be kidding? Khash Amin al Husseini was the head of the movement at the time. Also, the point of bringing up Hussaini stuff, embarrassing. The point of bringing up Husseini stuff wasn't to say that he was a great further of the Holocaust. It's that he might have been a great further in the prevention of Jews fleeing to go to Palestine to escape the Holocaust. That was the point. That was the point. And I explained why. I think, um, that's, that's not an entirely, um, accurate characterization. But then I wanted to make another point. If it's legitimate to bring up his role during World War two, why is it illegitimate to bring up a man who would become Israel's speaker of parliament, foreign ministers? Why is it. And, and also, he was a young terrorist and was also responsible for the murder of the United nations first international envoy, Bernadotte Foki Bernadotte. Why is all that irrelevant? I don't think anybody, I think that the reason why he was brought up was because jewish people in this time period would have viewed it as there was a prevention of Jews leaving Europe because of the Palestinians pressuring the British to put a curb that 75,000 immigration limit. Yes, but it's not about, like, it's not about them furthering the Holocaust or being an architect. Major, minor play in the Holocaust. Well, he was a major player in that region. So if you wanted to bring up. Like Morris was specific, made the specific claim that the Palestinians played an indirect role in the Holocaust. The indirect role would have been the prevention of people escaping from. Yes. And my response to that is, first of all, I disagree with that characterization. But second of all, how can you disagree with that? They prevented, they forced the British to prevent emigration of Jews, Muslim Europe, and reaching safe shores in Palestine. Again. They did. Again. And they knew that the. Was Palestine persecuted in Europe? Was Palestine the only spot of land on earth? Yes, basically that was the problem. The Jews couldn't immigrate. What about your great friends in Britain, the architects of the Balfour decade, by the late 1930s? What about the United States taking Jews and the Americans and why, and why. Are Palestinians who were not Europeans, who had zero role in the rise of Nazism, who had no relation to any of this, why are they somehow uniquely responsible for what happened in Europe? And uniquely, it was the only safe haven for Jews. That's right. Oh, really? The United States wasn't a potential safe haven. The only one was Palestine. The United States had no room, no Jews. It did have room, but it wasn't. But it didn't. Safe haven. This is something you be focusing your. America should be blamed for not letting Jews in during the thirties, but nobody. Blames them for the Holocaust. Well, indirectly, speaker one, I've never heard. It said that Franklin Delano Roosevelt was indirectly responsible for the Holocaust. I never heard that. Now maybe it's in israeli literature because the Israelis have gone mad. Yes. Your prime minister said the whole idea of the gas chambers came from the mufti of Jerusalem. That's nonsense. Yeah, we all know. But we also know that Netanyahu said it. Netanyahu. Netanyahu says so many things which are. And he happens to be the prologis. I can't be responsible for them. You're not responsible for them. But it is relevant that he is the longest serving prime minister of Israel. Unfortunately, he says something about the israeli. Public and he gets elected not despite saying such things, but because he says such things. His voters don't care about Khadjamin al Husseini or Hitler. They know nothing about his vote. They will be right. His base know nothing about, know nothing about anything. And he can say what he likes and they'll say yes or they don't care if he says these things, you. May well be right. But anyway, not to be the dead horse, but I don't, I still don't understand. I'll just conclude by saying I don't understand why the mufti of Jerusalem is relevant to. He is relevant. He is relevant. But the head of the palestinian Shamir. Wasn'T the head of the national movement. He represented 100 or 200 or 300 gunmen who were considered terrorists by the zionist movement at the time. The fact that 30 years later he becomes prime minister, that's the crux of history. Hajime, he was the head of the Palestine Arab national movement at the time. Anyway, what can you do? I think we're speaking past each other. We're not. I'm talking facts. Let's move to the modern day and we'll return to history. Maybe 67 and other important moments. But let's look to today in the recent months, October 7. Let me ask sort of a pointed question. Was October 7 attacks by Hamas on Israel genocidal? Was it an act of ethnic cleansing? Just so we lay out the moral calculus that we are engaged in. Maybe the problem with October 7 is this. The Hamas fighters who invaded southern Israel were sent, ordered to murder, rape, and do all the nasty things that they did. And they killed some 1200 Israelis that day and abducted them, as we know, something like 250, mostly civilians. Also, some soldiers took them back to Gaza, dungeons in Gaza. But they were motivated not just by the words of their current leader in the Gaza Strip, but by their ideology, which is embedded in their charter from 1988, if I remember correctly, and that charter is genocidal. It says that the Jews must be eradicated basically from the land of Israel, from Palestine. The Jews are described there as sons of apes and pigs. The Jews are a base people, killers of prophets, and they should not exist in Palestine. It doesn't say that they necessarily should be murdered all around the world, the Hamas charter, but certainly the Jews should be eliminated from Palestine. And this is the driving ideology behind the massacre of the Jews on October 7, which brought down on the Gaza Strip. And I think with the intention by the Hamas of the israeli counteroffensive, because they knew that that counteroffensive would result in many palestinian dead, because the Hamas fighters and their weaponry and so on were embedded in the population in Gaza. And they hoped to benefit from this in the eyes of world public opinion, as Israel chased these Hamas people and their ammunition dumps and so on, and killed lots of palestinian civilians in the process. All of this was understood by Sinwar, by the head of the Hamas, and he strived for that. But initially, he wanted to kill as many Jews as he could in the border areas around the Gaza Strip. I'll respond directly to the points you made, and then I'll leave it to norm to bring in the historical context that Hamas charter is from the nineties, I think, 1980, 819, 88, so it's from the eighties. I think your characterization of that charter as antisemitic is indisputable. I think your characterization of that charter is genocidal, is off the mark. It's implicit. And more importantly, that charter has been superseded by a new charter. In fact, has been. Well, there is, there is a. There is no new charter. There is a charter. There is an explanation, a statement, 2018 2018, supposedly clarifying things which are in the charter, but it doesn't actually step back from what the charter says. Eliminate Israel. Eliminate the Jews from the land of. Israel in 2018, the Hamas charter. If we look at the current version of the charter, it's not a call. To charter, whether you're calling it a charter. It wasn't. The only thing called the charter is what was issued in 1988 by Yassin himself. Anyway, it makes a clear distinction between Jews and Zionists in 2018. Now, you can choose to dismiss it, believe it, it's sincere, it's insincere, whatever. Insincere is probably the right word. Secondly, I'm really unfamiliar with fighters who consult these kinds of documents before they go on in the education system. In the kindergarten, they're told, kill the Jews. They practice with make believe guns and uniforms when they're five years old in the kindergartens of the Hamas, at the. Instruction of the commissioner general of Unruh. I didn't say that. I said the Hamas has kindergartens and summer camps in which they train to kill Jews children. Secondly. Secondly, you keep saying Jews, to which I would respond, they use the word Jews, to which I would respond that Hamas does not have a record of deliberately targeting Jews who are not Israelis. And in fact, it also doesn't have a record of deliberately targeting either Jews or Israelis outside Israel and Palestine. So, you know, all this talk of. Unlike the Hezbollah, which has taught well, we're talking about Jews outside. We're talking about Palestine. We're talking about October 7 and Hamas. If you'd also like to speak about Hezbollah, let's get to that separately, if you don't mind. So again, genocidal? Well, if that term is going to be discussed, my first response would be, let's talk about potentially genocidal actions against Israelis rather than against Jews for the reasons that I just mentioned. And again, I find this constant conflation of Jews, Israel Zionism to be a bit disturbing. Secondly, I think there are quite a few indications in the factual record that raise serious questions about the accusations of the genocidal intent and genocidal practice of what happened on October 7. And my final point would be, I don't think I should take your word for it. I don't think you should take my word for it. I think what we need here is a proper, independent, international investigation, and the reason we need that of genocide during this conflict, whether bye Palestinians on October 7 or Israel thereafter. And the reason that we need such an investigation is because Hamas is, there won't be any hearings on what Hamas did on October 7 at the International Court of Justice, because the International Convention on the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide deals only with states and not with movements. I think the International Criminal Court, and specifically its current prosecutor, Garim Khan, lacks any and all credibility. Hes been an absolute failure at his job. Hes just been sitting on his backside for years on this file. And I think I would point out that Hamas has called for independent investigations of all these allegations. Israel has categorically rejected any international investigation, of course, supported by the United States. And I think what is required is to have credible investigations of these things, because I don't think you're going to convince me. I don't think I'm going to convince you. And this is two people sitting across the table from each other. No, there's certain things you don't even have to investigate. You know how many citizens, civilians died in the October 7 assault? Yes, but that's not. You know that there are lots of allegations of rape. I don't know how persuaded you are of those. They did find bodies without heads, which is. There were no beheads. There were some beheadings, apparently. The Israelis didn't even claim that in the document they submitted before the ICJ. Go read what your government submitted. It never mentioned beheadings. Well, as far as I know, people who were beheaded. But we could bring it up right now. You also deny that there were rapes there? I didn't deny. I said I've not seen convincing evidence that confirms it. I've said that from day one, and I'll say today, four and a half months later. Do you know that they killed eight or 900 civilians in their. Absolutely. That seems to me indisputable. Oh, okay. Well, I'm glad that you're interested. I've said that from day one. Well, to be clear, you haven't. You did a debate. I don't remember the talk show, but you seem to imply that there was a lot of crossfire, and then it might have been the IDF that I. Killed a lot of. I said that there is no question, because the names were published in Haritz. There's no question that roughly, of the 1200 people killed, 800 of them were civilians. I see 850. Fine. So I never said that. But then I said, no, we don't know exactly how they were killed, but 800 civilians killed, 850, no question there. And I also said, on repeated occasions, there cannot be any doubt, in my opinion as of now, with the available evidence that Hamas was responsible for significant atrocities. And they made sure to include the plural. There's a lot of tricky language being employed here. Do you think of the Anode 50? It's called attaching value to words and not talking like a motor mouth. I am very careful about qualifying because that's what language is about. That's great. Then let me just ask a clarifying question. Do you firmly believe that the majority of the 850 civilians were killed by Hamas? My view is, even if it were, half 400 is a huge number by any reckoning. Okay, wait. You didn't even wait because Benny. Because Professor Morris, I don't know. I agree with Moen Robani. I'm not sure if he concedes the 400. I'll say because I have thought up the 400. Right. As I said, maybe a couple of individuals were killed in this region. I don't know. You're saying, professor, you believe this particular thing and you clearly don't. You clearly don't believe this, right? You know, you said people died. That's not controversial. Wait, hold on, hold on. That's not controversial. Mister Pinelike, I attach value to words. You said that. Mister Brunell, please slow down the speech and attempt to listen. When I was explicitly asked by Piers Morgan, I said there can be no question that Hamas committed atrocities. I've heard this on October 7, if you want me to pin down a number, I can't do that and ask. You to find out a number. You can listen to what I'm asking. No, my question is. I'll ask. I'll ask a very precise question. Sorry. It's a very easy. If I understood your question correctly. My question is, do you think the majority of the people that were killed on October 7, civilians, were killed by Hamas? Or are we subscribing to the idea that the IDF killed hundreds? Four or 500? No, but let me explain why that's a difficult question to answer. The total number of civilians killed was 800. 850. We know that Hamas is responsible, probably for the majority of those killings. We also know that there were killings by islamic jihad. We also know we're bunching together the. Islamic jihad and the Hamas. That's splitting hairs. No, but he means the raiders. I'm speaking in opposition to the conspiracy theory that people like. Do you prefer Norm or Professor Frankelstein or. I don't know. How do you prefer. Well, it's not a conspiracy theory. Well, the conspiracy theory is the idea that the IDF killed the majority of them. It's not a conspiracy theory. Oh, and there's also a theory that, as Norm pointed out on the show that he was on, that he thought that it was very strange that given how reputable israeli services are when it comes to sending ambulances retrieving bodies. He thought it was very strange that that number was continually being adjusted. And do you know why you say. That in combination with. Well, I'm nothing. Not sure how many were killed. Well, do you know why the number went down? The number went down because the israeli authorities were in possession of 200 corpses that were burned to a crisp that they assumed were Israelis who had been killed on October 7. They later determined that these were, in fact, palestinian fighters. Now, how does a palestinian fighter get burnt to a crisp? No, you're mixing two things. Some of the bodies they weren't able to identify, and eventually they ruled that some of them were actually arab marauders rather than israeli victims. A few of them, also of the Jews, were burnt to a crisp. And it took them time to work this out. And they came out initially with a slightly higher figure, 1400 dead, and eventually reduced it to 1200 Israelis. And the reason is that a proportion of israeli civilians killed on October 7, I don't believe it was a majority. We don't know how many. Some were killed in crossfire, some were killed by israeli shellfire, helicopter fire, and so on. And the majority were killed by Palestinians. And of that majority, we don't know. I mean, again, I understood your question as referring specifically to Hamas, which is why I tried to answer it that way. But if you meant generically Palestinians, yes, if you mean specifically Hamas, we don't have a clear breakdown of how. I don't mean specifically Hamas, but I just think when you use the word some, that's doing a lot of heavy lifting. We use some, that's fine, but some can mean anywhere from 1% to 49%. But we don't know. So the numbers here and the details are interesting and important almost from a legal perspective. But if we zoom out the moral perspective, are Palestinians from Gaza justified in violent resistance? Well, Palestinians have the right to resistance. Palestinian. That right includes the right to armed resistance. At the same time, armed resistance is subject to the laws of war, and there are very clear regulations that separate legitimate acts of armed resistance from acts of armed resistance that are not legitimate. The attacks of October 7, where did they land? For you? There has been almost exclusive focus on the attacks on civilian population centers and the killings of civilians on October 7. What is much, much less discussed to the point of amnesia is that there were very extensive attacks on israeli military and intelligence facilities on October 7. I would make a very clear distinction between those two. And secondly, I'm not sure that I would characterize the efforts by Palestinians on October 7 to seize israeli territory and israeli population centers, as in and of themselves illegitimate. You mean attacking israeli civilians legitimate? No, no, that's not what I said. I didn't understand what you said. I think what you had on October 7 was an effort by Hamas to seize israeli territory and populations and kill civilians. That's not what I said. What I said is I think I would not describe the effort to seize israeli territory, as in and of itself illegitimate, as a separate issue from the killing of israeli civilians. In those cases where they had been deliberately targeted, that's very clearly illegitimate. Those families were slaughtered in kibbutz, but. I'm making many of them left wingers. Accidentally, who helped Palestinians go to hospitals in Israel and so on, again, drove palestinian cancer patients to hospitals. Again, I'm making a distinction. You don't seem to be very condemnatory of what the Hamas did. Well, I don't do selective condemnation. I'm not talking about selective condemnation. I don't do selective condemnation of this specific. Well, you know what. You know what it is. You know, I would. I would, for example, condemn israeli assaults on civilians. Deliberate assaults on civilians. Yes, I would condemn them. But you're not doing that. You know Hamas. You know what the issue is. I've been speaking in public now, I would say, since the late 1980s and interviewed and so on. I have never, on one occasion, ever been asked to condemn any israeli act when I've been in group discussions, those supporting the israeli action or perspective, I have never encountered an example where these individuals are asked to condemn what Israel is doing. The demand and obligation of condemnation is exclusively applied, and my personal experience over decades is exclusively applied to Palestinians. Israel is condemned day and night on every television channel, on every. I'm telling you about a personal experience lasting decades. Quote. Oh, no, I'm trying to quote what you just said. I shouldn't have said anything. At any point. You should say, Professor Morris. Yes. You just said, I would condemn any time Israel deliberately attacks civilians. Okay, the problem, Professor Morris, is over and over again you claim, in the face of overwhelming evidence, that they didn't attack civilians. That's not true. I've said civilians, professor. Israel attacks extensively about. I know that in Kafir Qassim, the civilians. And now let's. You're just eliminating, selecting. Cherry pick, if I were you. Cherry picked. So let's fast forward when you were an adult. What did you say about the 1982 Lebanon war? What did I say? You don't remember? Okay, allow me. Okay. So it happens that I was not at all, by any I had no interest in the Israel Palestine conflict as a young man until the 19. This is true. Until the 1982 Lebanon war. Yeah, lost the passage. I'll find it. Okay, real quick, while he's searching for that. Yeah, allow me. You bring up something that's really important that a lot of people don't draw a distinction between, in that there is just causes for war and there is just ways to act within a war. And these two things principally do have a distinction from one another. Correct. However, while I appreciate the recognition of the distinction, the idea that the cause for war that Hamas was engaged in, I don't believe if we look at their actions in war or the statements that they've made, it doesn't seem like it had to do with territorial acquisition. No, no, no. The point taking land. No, the point I was making was what was Hamas trying to achieve militarily on October 7? And I was pointing out that the focus has been very much on Hamas attacks on civilians and atrocities and so on. And I'm not saying those things should be ignored. What im saying is that whats getting lost in the shuffle is that there were extensive attacks on military and intelligence facilities. And as far as, lets say, the other aspects are concerned, because I think either you or lex asked me about the legitimacy of these attacks, I said im unclear whether efforts by Hamas to seize israeli population centers in and of themselves are illegitimate, as opposed to actions that either deliberately targeted israeli civilians or actions that should reasonably have been expected to result in the killings of israeli civilians. Those strike me as, by definition, illegitimate. And I want to be very clear about that. Illegitimate means you condemn them, illegitimate means they are not legitimate. I have a problem condemning your side. Yes. No, not condemning my side. I have a problem with selective outrage and I have a problem with selective condemnation. And as I explained to you a few minutes ago, in my decades of appearing in public and being interviewed, I have never seen, I have never been asked to condemn an israeli action. I've never been asked for a moral judgment on an israeli action. Exclusive request for condemnation has to do with what Palestinians do. And just as importantly, I'm sure if you watch BBC or CNN, when is the last time an israeli spokesperson has been asked to condemn an israeli act? I've never seen it. I don't think we condemn the arab side either, though. Right? I don't think there's any condemnation, no. But now that we're talking about israeli victims, all of a sudden, morality is. Well, I think the reason why it comes up is because there's no shortage of international condemnation for Israel. As norm will point out a million times that there are 50 billion UN resolutions. You've got amnesia international, you've got multiple bodies of the UN. You've got now this case for the ICJ. So there's no question of if there's condemnation. But. Sorry, if I can interrupt you. In 1948, the entire world stood behind the establishment of a jewish state. In the entire world. No. Except the arab states and the muslim states. Well, not the entire world. Okay. But I think you know what I mean by that. The western democracies. That's what you're saying. Well, then also, just my quick question. Supported the establishment of Israel. My quick question was you said that you believe that this is a very short one. You don't have to. It's just. You think that there's an argument to be made that the people in Gaza, that Hamas and islamic jad, whoever participated, had a just cause for war. Maybe they didn't do it in the correct way, but they maybe had a just cause for war. I don't think there's a maybe there. The Palestinians. Okay. You think they absolutely had a just cause for it. Do you think that Israel has a just cause for operations towards of iron? No, of course not. Okay. All right. You can say your quote. Okay, first of all, on this issue of double standards, which is the one that irks or irritates moin, you said that you are not a person of double standards. Unlike I, people like Moin, you hold high a single standard, and you condemn deliberate israeli attacks on civilians when they occur. Yeah, and I would say that's true for the period up till 1967. And I think it's accurate. Your account of the first intifada there. It seems to me you were in conformity with most mainstream accounts. And the case of the first intifada, you also used, surprisingly, you used arab human rights sources like al Haq, which I think Muin worked for during the first intifada. That's true. But then something very strange happens. So let's illustrate it. Wait, there's something strange which happened is the Arabs rejecting. Okay, wait. Peace offers by accepting the Oslo agreement. Yeah. By rejecting each time a Camp David. If we have time. I know the record very well. I'd be very happy to go through it with you. But let's get to those double standards. So this is what you have to say about Israel's invasion of Lebanon in 1982. You said, Israel, Washington, reluctant to harm civilians, sought to avoid casualties on both sides and took care not to harm lebanese and palestinian civilians. He then went on to acknowledge the massive use of IDF firepower against civilians during the siege of Beirut, which traumatized israeli society. Morris quickly enters the caveat that Israel tried to pinpoint military targets, but inevitably many civilians were hit. That's your description of the Lebanon war? As I say, that's when I first got involved in the conflict. I am a voracious reader. I read everything on the Lebanon war. I would say there is not a single account of the Lebanon war in which the estimates are between 15 and 20,000 palestinian Lebanese were killed, overwhelmingly civilians. The biggest bloodletting until the current Gaza genocide. Biggest bloodletting, I would say. I can't think of a single mainstream account that remotely approximates what you just said. So, leaving aside, I can name the books voluminous, huge volumes. I'll just take one example. Now, you will remember, because I think you served in Lebanon in 80 02:00 a.m. i. Correct on that? Yeah. Yeah. So you will remember that dove Yarmia kept the war diary. So, with your permission, allow me to describe what he wrote during his diary. So he writes, the war machine of the IDF is galloping and trampling over the conquered territory, demonstrating a total insensitivity to the fate of the Arabs who are found in its path. A PLO run hospital suffered a direct hit. Thousands of refugees are returning to the city. When they arrive at their homes, many of which have been destroyed or damaged, you hear their cries of pain and their howls over the deaths of their loved ones. The air is permeated with the smell of destruction and continuing. Does that sound like your description of the Lebanon war? Forget my descriptions for credit. The point you're making. Let me just finish my sentence. The point you're making, which you somehow forget, is that there are Israelis who strongly criticize their own side and describe how Israelis are doing things which they regard as immoral. You don't find that on the arab side? I'm talking about Mister Morris. I'm not talking about devil. Meow is the left talking about you? The historian. How did you depict the Lebanon? Because I believe that the israeli military tried to avoid committing a civilian cast. By Robert Fisk and pity the next. Journalist I know has always been right. So that's why you can say with such confidence that you don't commit, you don't condemn deliberate israeli attacks on. Because there weren't any. No, I didn't say there weren't any. Yeah, you didn't. You agreed that I have condemned israeli attacks? Yes, there are civilians. I never quarrel with facts. Your. Your description of the 1982 war is so shocking, it makes my innards writhe. And then your description of the second intifada, your description of defensive shield. When the Arabs were bombing suicide bombers, arab suicide bombers were destroying Jews in masses and buses and in restaurants. That's the second intifada. Do you remember that? You can try suicide bombers in Jerusalem's buses. I am completely aware of that. But if you forgot the numbers, it was three to one. The number killed mostly armed palestinian. That's what you say, but that's not what Amnesty International said. That's not what human rights was. I don't remember what they said. I do. No, that's not what. They're right. I don't know whether their figures are right. My figures are right. Listen, listen. In the second, rather, some four Palestinians, Professor Morris, most of them armed people. And Israelis, that's a thousand Israelis were killed, almost all of them. No, Professor Morris, fantasy. But I'm not going to argue with here. Here's a simple challenge. You said not to look at the camera. Scares the people. I'll make the open challenge. You are going to scare them. No, Professor Morris, open challenge. Words are in print. I wrote 50 pages analyzing all of your work. I quote, some will say cherry pick, but I think accurately quote you. Here's a simple. Answer me in print. Answer what I wrote and show where I'm making things up. Answer me in print. I'm sorry, I'm not familiar with. That's no problem. You're a busy man. You're an important historian. You don't have to know everything that's in print, especially by modest publishers. But now you know. And so here's the public challenge. You answer and show where I cherry picked, where I misrepresented. Send me the article. Fine. And then we can have a civil, scholarly discussion. I'm not sure we will agree, even. If we don't have to agree. It's for the reader to decide, looking at both sides, where this truth stands. And if I may ask, it's good to discuss ideas that are in the air now, as opposed to citing literature that was written in the past as much as possible, because listeners were not familiar with the literature. So, like, whatever was written, just express it. Condense the key idea, and then we can debate the ideas. There are two aspects. There's a public debate, but there's also written words. Yes. I'm just telling you that you, as an academic historian, put a lot of value in the written word, and I think it is valuable. But in this, he's incidentally, not the. Only historian who puts value to words. I also do, actually, more than just. One or two sentences at a time. But in this context, just for the. Educational purpose of teaching people, why would people commit what I have to acknowledge, because I am faithful to the facts. Massive atrocities on October 7. Why did that happen? And I think that's the problem. The past is erased, and we suddenly went from 1948 to October 7, 2023, and there is a problem there. So, first of all, you have complete freedom to backtrack, and we'll go there with you. Obviously, we can't cover every single year, every single event, but there's probably critical moments in time. Can I respond to something relating to the Lebanon war? I looked up the book that he got this from and what the quote was from. It sounds cold to say it, but war is tragic and civilians die. There is no war. That this has not happened in. In the history of all of humankind. The statement that Israel might take care not to target civilians is not incompatible with a diary entry from someone who said they saw civilians getting killed. I think that sometimes we do a lot of weird games when we talk about international humanitarian law or laws that govern conflict, where we say things like civilians dying as a war crime or civilian homes or hospitals getting destroyed as necessarily a war crime, or is necessarily somebody intentionally targeting civilians without making distinctions between military targets or civilian ones. I think that when we analyze different attacks or when we talk about the conduct of a military, I think it's important to understand, like perspectively from the unit of analysis of the actual military committing the acts, what's happening and what are the decisions being made, rather than just saying retrospectively, oh, well, a lot of civilians died. Not very many military people died, comparatively speaking. So it must have been war crimes, especially when you've got another side. Fast forward to Hamas, that intentionally attempts to induce those same civilian numbers, because Hamas is guilty of any war crime that you would potentially accuse. And this is according to the Amnesty International people that norm loves to cite. Hamas is guilty of all of these same war crimes, of them failing to take care of the civilian population, of them, essentially utilizing human shields to try to fire rockets free from attacks. Essentially. Essentially, yes. I'm just saying that essentially in terms of how international law defines it, not how Amnesty International defines it, but Amnesty International describes times of human shielding, but they don't actually apply the correct international legal standard. I. Absolutely. I'm just saying. I'm just saying believe it or not, normal. The entire Geneva conventions is all on Wikipedia. It's a wonderful website. But I'm just saying that on the Hamas side, if there's an attempt to induce this type of military activity, attempt to induce civilian harm, that it's not just enough to say, like, well, here's a diary entry where a guy talks about how tragic. I think the problem with your statement is that if you go back and listen to it, the first part of it is war is hell. Civilians die. It's a fact of life. And you state that in a very factual matter. Then when you start talking about Hamas, all of a sudden you've discovered morality and you've discovered condemnation, and you've discovered intent, and you are unfortunately, far from alone in this. I'll give you. I'll give you. You know who, for me, is a perfect example. Speaker one. Wait, hold on. Just something. We don't need examples. No. The false equivalency of the two sides is astounding. When Hamas kills civilians in a surprise attack on October 7, this isn't because they are attempting to target military targets and they happen to stumble into a giant festival of people that. Well, they did happen to stumble into it. They did, but they're not. But when they stumbled into it, it wasn't an issue of trying to figure out a military. They weren't failing in distinction. There wasn't a proportionality assessment done. It was just to kill civilians. Even the Amnesty International in 2008 and in 2014 and even today will continue to. I don't think there's any. Find anyone who will deny that Hamas has targeted civilians. Sure, you gave the example, but there's a difference. Of suicide bombings during the second intifada. I mean, facts are facts. Sure, but I'm saying that the Hamas targeting of civilians is different than the incidental loss of life that occurs when Israel does. How, you know, genocide is the intentional mass murder. Genocide is an entirely separate claim. Yeah, but the idea that Israel is not in the business of intentionally targeting civilians. I know that's what we're supposed to believe, but the historical record stands. No, no, that doesn't. Clearly, I don't believe it does. You've written about. Well, when you say historical, do you mean like in the forties to the. Or do you mean like over the past, like that? From the thirties of the last century to the twenties of this century? I just like to make, you know, you, the way you characterized it. I think the best example of that I've come across during this specific conflict is John Kirby, the White House spokesman. I've named him tears tossed around for a very good reason. When he's talking about palestinian civilian deaths, war is hell. You know, it's a fact of life. Get used to it. When he was confronted with israeli civilian deaths on October 7, he literally broke down tears. He understood that one is deliberate and one isn't. He understood that? No, that's what he tried to make us. No, no. He was speaking facts. The Hamas guys who attacked the kibbutzim, apart from the attacks on the military sites, when they attacked the kibbutzim, were out to kill civilians, and they killed family after family, house after house. The israeli attacks on Hamas installations and fighters. No, you don't know israeli pilots. That's the problem. Thank God. You know. No, you don't know israeli pilots. They believe that they are killing hamasniks. They're given searches. Sure. They believe it. And if the Hamas hiding behind civilians, civilians die every time they talk, every. Time they target a kid. I'm sure they believe it's Hamas. When they. Kid. Yeah, with the. Yeah. When they killed the four kids in the. They believe. Yeah, I know. They believe. Even though they were the miniative side. You know, even though they were. Let's leave aside. I know what he's quoting correctly. You've lied about this instance in the past. Those kids weren't just on the beach, as is often stated articles. Those kids were literally coming out of a pretty previously identified Hamas compound that they have separated from. They literally did. With all due respect, you're such a fantastic moron. It's terrifying. That wharf was filled with journalists. There were tens, scores of journalists. That was an old fisherman's shack. What are you talking about? Talking about? It's so painful. It's so painful to listen to this idiocy. And to be clear, on the other side, you're implying that a strike was okayed on the israeli side, where they said, we're just gonna kill four palestinian children today for no reason. Do you believe that? Do you believe that. They were children? Here we go. They will never answer that question. I will answer the question. Pilots will out there. I will even have children, because that was a strike. That was a drone strike, so it was approved. All we have to say that we're going to kill children today. Do you want me to answer, or do you want your motor mouth to go? Okay, answer. In 2018, there was the great march of return in Gaza. By all reckonings of human rights organizations and journalists who were there, it was overwhelmingly nonviolent. But organized by the Hamas. What? Whoever organized. Organized by Satan. Let's start. Satan. I agree. Let's. Let's go for the big one, the big Megillah. It's Satan. Okay. Overwhelmingly organized, overwhelmingly nonviolent. Resembled at the beginning, the first bombs, here and there. First intifada represent the first. Okay. Not bombs, but they tried to make. Holes in the space. Okay. Obviously. Let's continue. Yeah, so. But I'm not sure Israel behaved morally in that thing. Okay, okay. No, no, no. Okay, wait, wait, wait, wait. I'm willing to grant. Please, please. I'm willing to. Allow me to. You don't have to proceed. I'm willing to. Allow me. Allow me to finish. I don't know anything about this. I'd like. Okay, so, as you know, along the Gaza perimeter, there was Israel's best trained snipers, correct? I don't know. Best training. It was fine. Snipers. Okay, all right. Hey, laugh. It's hilarious. The story is so funny, you're lying. About aspects of violence to it. According. Even the UN says it themselves. Okay, but you only select what the UN says that you like. Sure. The problem, mister Morelli, is you don't know the english language. You don't know. I can read from the UN website itself. In regards to the great march of return, they said majority of protesters acted in a peaceful manner. During most protests, dozens have approached the fence, attempting to damage it, burning tires, throwing stones and Molotov cocktails towards israeli forces flying incendiary kites and balloons into israeli territory. The latter resulting in extensive damage to agricultural land and nature reserves inside Israel, and risk the lives of israeli civilians. Some incidents of shooting an explosives. Talk fast. Talk fast. I'm just trying to think that you're coherent. I'm just reading from the UN. Yeah, but you like the guy and. They agree with you. You got the months wrong. You got the months wrong. We're talking about the beginning. In March 30, 2021. You described that march. Mostly peaceful. Speaker. Okay, allow me to finish. So there were the snipers. Okay, now you find it so far fetched. Israelis purposely, deliberately targeting civilians. That's such a far fetched idea. An overwhelmingly nonviolent march. What did the international. It was a campaign. Whatever you want to call. For months. Whatever you want to call. Months. Yeah. What did the UN investigation find? Well, he just read. I read the report. I don't read things off of those machines. I read the report. What did it find? Brace yourself. You thought it was so funny, the idea of IDF targeting civilians. It found. Go look. This up on your machine. I already know what you're gonna say. You're gonna say it. Found that only one or two of. Them were justified killings, targeted journalists, targeted medics. And here's the funniest one of all. It's so hilarious. They targeted disabled people who were 300 meters away from the fence and just standing by trees. If it's true. Just quick pause. I think everything was fascinating to listen to except the mention of hilarious. Nobody finds any of this hilarious. And if any of us are laughing, it's not at the suffering of civilians or suffering of anyone. It's at the obvious joyful camaraderie in the room. I'm enjoying it and also the joy of learning. So thank you. Can we talk about the targeting civilian thing a little bit? I think there's like an important underlying. Not necessarily that. I just. I think it's important to understand. Yeah, I think it's important to understand. There's like three different things here that we need to think about. So one is a policy of killing civilians. Do we. So I would ask the other side. I'm gonna ask all three. Cause I know there won't be a short answer. Do you think there is a policy top down from the IDF to target civilians? That's one thing. A second thing is he said yes when I. Yeah, sure. Yeah, that's fine. But then the second thing is. Or there's. There's two distinctions I want to draw between. I think Benny would say this. I would say this. I am sure. Undoubtedly there have been cases where IDF soldiers, for no good reason, have targeted and killed Palestinians that they should not have done that would be prosecutable as war crimes, as defined by the rum statue and the IDF. Some have been prosecuted. Yeah. And I'm absolutely sure. Practically none. Sure. I'm sure. I'm sure that we would all agree for soldiers if that happens. But I think that it's important. I think that it's important that when we talk about military strikes or when we talk about things, especially involving bombings or drone attacks, these are things that are signed off by multiple different layers of command, by multiple people involved in an operation, including intelligence gathering, including weaponeering. And there also have typically lawyers involved. When you make the claim that an IDF soldier shot a Palestinian, those three people, the three hostages that came up with white flags and something horrible happened, I think that's a fair statement to make and I think a lot of criticism is deserved. But when you make the statement that four children were killed by a strike, the claim that you're making. Yeah. Deliberately. Yeah. The claim that you're making. The claim that you're making is that multiple levels of the idea of signed off on just killing have no idea what. If you don't understand the process, then let me educate you. I can tell you I do understand the process. I'm telling you right now, no basic military. Anybody aside from Wikipedia, can you tell me what your knowledge work in the military? What's your knowledge of the idea? Audience can look this up. Do you think that. Do you think that. Do you think that bombing and strikes are decided by one person in the field? Do you think one person can I respond to airplane on drone strikes that are designed to figure out how to strike and who to strike. So when you say that four children are targeted, you're saying that a whole apparatus is trying to murder Palestinian. You meant my argument better than this ridiculous argument because really that it's impossible at the command level. It's impossible at that command level. But you said that they couldn't have done it at the bottom if it weren't. Also, you don't understand the strength of the claim that you're making. You're saying that from a top down level that lawyers, multiple commanders tell me what I'm understand or Palestinians. It's true. It's true. I don't spend my nights on Wikipedia. I read books. I admit that as a signal. I know books are a waste of time. With all due regard, two or three. Quotes that you use, I completely respect the fact, and I'll say it on the air as much as I find totally disgusting. What's come of your politics? A lot of the books are excellent. And I'll even tell you, because I'm not afraid of saying it. Whenever I have to check on the basic fact, the equivalent of going to the Britannica, I go to your books. I know you got a lot of the facts right. Benny Moore's listener. I would never say books are a waste of time. And it's regrettable to you that you got strapped with a partner who thinks that all the wisdom. All the wisdom. He didn't say they're a waste of time. I'd like to respond to what you were saying. I think the question that we're trying. To answer, I think you don't understand Israel. Let me finish. Really understands Israel, how it works. I think we're all agreed that Palestinians have deliberately targeted civilians. Whether we're talking about Hamas and Islamic Jihad today or previously. I prefer the word murdered and raped rather than targeted. Targeted is too soft for what the Hamas did. I'm. Okay, I'm not talking about. I'm talking about this now. Yeah, but I'm trying to answer his question. Yeah. Okay. Historically, there is substantial evidence that Palestinians have targeted civilians. Whether. Whether it's been incidental or systematic is a different discussion. I don't want to get into that now. For some reason, there seems to be a huge debate about whether any Israeli has ever sunk so low as to target a civilian. No, we've agreed both this has happened. Here, and I think. Agreed on that. Okay. I think what we're saying is it's. Not policy, which is what you guys are implying, that they kill civilians deliberately. If I understand you correctly, you're basically making the claim that none of these attacks could have happened without going through an entire chain of commitment for strike. Cells that are involved in, like, drone attacks or plane attacks or. Yes, my understanding of the israeli military. And you could perhaps you've served in it, you would know better. It's actually a fairly chaotic organization. No, no, that's not true. Especially not the air force. Extremely, extremely organized. The air force works in a very organized fashion, as he says, with lawyers, chain of command, and ultimately the pilot drops the bomb where he's told to drop it. Was that 200 strikes in, like, 60 seconds? I think. I think at the opening of protective edge, like. Yeah, the coordination between. You're talking about 2008, I think, was 2014. But I'm just saying that the coordination in the military is pretty tight. My understanding of the israeli military is that it's quite chaotic, and there's also a lot of testimonies from Israel. But be that as it may, okay, I'm prepared to accept both of your contentions that it's a highly organized and disciplined force. Air force, under any scenario, is going to be more organized than the other branches. And you're saying such a strike would have been inconceivable? Well, I'm not necessarily saying inconceivable. I'm just saying that, like, that would have required. Okay. You're basically murderous, and for so many people, yes. I don't think good evidence has been presented to say that that's the. Your basic claim is that it would be fair to assume that such a strike could have only been carried out with multiple levels of authorization and signing off. Okay, let's accept that for the sake of argument. We have now seen incident after incident after incident after incident where entire families are vaporized in single strikes. Who is in the families, who lives in the house, family members. No one's next to the house in. Which these families we have seen incident. Do you know that Hamasniks weren't in that house? Do you know that their ammunition dumps weren't? Why do I have to prove a negative? You're saying that they deliberately targeted families? If Israel wanted to kill civilians in Gaza, they could have killed 500,000 by now. With the number of. The fact that they've only killed a. Certain small number, 30,000 is a small number in proportion. You consider 30,000 small number in proportion. Over four months probably is an indication that targeted and that there are Hamas targets in these places. So I've given children is only. And if that's the case, why is it? Yeah, you said only. Only, though. Professor Morris, here's a question for you. If we take every combat zone in the world for the past three years, every combat zone in the world. In Vietnam, the Americans killed a million people. 40 million. I wasn't. Yeah, I was again, in the anti war movement, so don't strap me the million people. Fine, fine. And. And 30 million Russians were killed. So in world War two. So everything else is irrelevant. Okay, here's the question, Professor Morris. Here's a question. It's very perplexing. If you take every combat zone in the world for the past three years, and you multiply the number of children killed by four, every combat zone, the world. You get gossip. Okay, so when you. What is it proposed to prove? Okay, I'm gonna. I'm gonna tell you. Firstly, you're a lion. Shut up. You're relying. No, I'm not relying on the numbers that everybody else. I'm lying in the numbers, though. What is that? Those are mass numbers. Okay, okay. Which may not be true. Fine. They could invent anything because you know that they are a menacious organization. I know. Mendacious, believe me. You like mendacious, as in the Israeli Ministry of Foreign affairs. Okay, so here's the thing. You say they could have killed 500,000, but they only killed only. That's your word. I'm not only killed 30,000. You believe that they deliberately target civilians. They would have killed many more. The fact is that they don't target civilians, Morris, for. And you don't understand, for a historian. I don't want to understand israeli society. You want to know the truth. I don't want to. I don't want to get inside their heads. That's the problem. 90% of the Israelis. A good historian, tries to get into the heads of. There's a limit. There's a limit when 90% of Israelis think that Israel is using enough. Orlando. Too little force in Gaza. I don't want to get inside that head. 40% think that Israel is using insufficient force in Gaza. I don't want to get inside that head. I don't want to get inside. Ahead of people who think they're using insufficient force against the population. Against a population, half of which is children. I don't want to get inside that head. But here is the point. Because your partner wants to know the point. You don't understand political constraints. One of your ministers said, let's drop an atomic bomb on you. Really meant that? He said it. Three years. No, no, no. It was said in a sort of a professor Morris questionable way. He didn't say they should drop. I'm not supporting him. He's an idiot, this minister. He didn't say dropping a. None other than Israel's chief historian, the famed, justifiably famed Benny Morris thinks we should be dropping nuclear weapons on Iran. Iran has for years, its leaders for years have said we should destroy Israel. You agree with that? They've said we should destroy Israel. Israel must be destroyed. Is that correct? This is what the iranian leaders have been saying since Khomeini. I would say iranian leaders have sent mixed messages. Okay. Okay. But some of them have said, including. The Houthis, are complicated to the extent. That the Houthis are trying to stop the genocide. In God's eyes. I support. I know I selectively support international law when it agrees with you, and then when it doesn't, you decide to throw international. Norm, let me read what you said. Norm. Norm, stop. Please. Norm, just for me, please. Just give me a second. You said that there's no genocide going on in Gaza. Let me ask that clear question, the same question I asked on Hamas attacks. Is there, from a legal, philosophical, moral perspective, is there genocide going on in Gaza today? Is there a genocide going on in Gaza? Well, in several years, we will have a definitive response to that question. What has happened thus far is that on the 29 December, the Republic of South Africa instituted proceedings against Israel pursuant to the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the crime of genocide. South Africa basically accused Israel of perpetrating genocide in the Gaza Strip. On the 26 January, the court issued its initial ruling. The court at this stage is not making a determination on whether Israel has or has nothing committed genocide. So just as it has not found Israel guilty, it certainly also hasn't found Israel innocent. What the court had to do at this stage was take one of two decisions. Either South Africa's case was the equivalent of a frivolous lawsuit and dismiss it and close the proceedings, or it had to determine that South Africa presented a plausible case that Israel was violating its obligations under the genocide convention and that it would, on that basis, hold a full hearing. Now, a lot of people have looked at the court's ruling of the 26 January and focused on the fact that the court did not order a ceasefire. I actually wasn't expecting it to order a ceasefire, and I wasn't surprised that it didn't, because in the other cases that the court has considered, most prominently Bosnia and Myanmar, it also didn't order a ceasefire. And South Africa, in requesting a ceasefire, also didn't ask the court to render an opinion on the legitimacy, or lack thereof, of Israel's. Israel's military operation. From my perspective, the key issue on the 26 January was whether the court would simply dismiss the case or decide to proceed with it. And it decided to proceed. We decided to proceed. And I think that's enormously. I thought that was enormous. But you said they committed genocide. You already said they committed genocide. It's committing genocide. But if I can just allow me, allow me. That's correct. Now, I don't run away. So, Norman, you did say he's running. Can you let me finish? Well, the end of the story is you specifically asked whether I think Israel is committing genocide. I explained formally there is no finding. And as you said, we won't know for a number of years. And I think there's legitimate questions to be raised. I mean, in the Bosnia case, which I think all four of us would agree was clearly a case of justice. Genocide, the court determined. You mean by the Serbs? Yes. In the Bosnia case, the court determined that of all the evidence placed before them, only Srebrenica qualified as genocide and all the other atrocities committed did not qualify as genocide. You know, international law is a developing organism. I don't know how the court is going to respond in this case, so I wouldn't take it as a foregone conclusion how the court is going to respond. But Norman has determined already. I have, too, because you're asking my personal opinion. Personal opinion is also so as a matter of law, I want to state very clearly it has not been determined and won't be determined for several years. Based on my observations and the evidence before me, I would say it's indisputable that Israel is engaged in a genocidal assault against the palestinian people in the Gaza Strip. Yeah, with the program, the PLO is long. Pastor, as you were saying, genocide is not a body count. Genocide consists of two elements. The destruction of a people in whole or in part. So in other words, you can commit genocide by killing 30,000 people. It doesn't have. Well, five probably is below the threshold. Yes, but I think 30,000 crosses the threshold and not reaching 500,000 is probably relevant. And the second element is there has to be an intent. In other words. And you believe there's an intent? Yes. I think if there is any other plausible reason for why all these people are being murdered, it's not genocide. And as far as intent is, what. About hiding behind a human shield? You don't think that's the reason for them being killed? Well, let's get the intent part out of the way first. South Africa's. Forget South Africa. I'd like to finish government. That's got nothing to do with anything. I think they're pro Satan as well. Last time. No, they're pro Hamas for some reason. You don't have a problem with people being pro Israeli at the time of. Of this. But if they support Palestinians right to life or self determination, they get demonized and delegitimized as prohibited. An organization which murdered 1200 people deliberately. That's my point. But supporting a state that has murdered 30,000. But they haven't, because these are. 30,000 are basically human, used by the Hamas, in which the Hamas normally wanted killed. They wanted them killed. If I. Hamas wanted these people. If I could just get. You don't think they wanted them killed? No, I don't provide them with shelters. They build tunnels for their fighters, but not one shelter for their own civilian. You asked me about intent. Of course they want them killed. You asked me about intent. And the reason that I bought in the south african application is because it is actually exceptionally detailed on intent. By quoting numerous sorts of idiotic ministers in Israel. Well, yeah. Including the prime minister, the defense minister, the chief of staff. Didn't say genocide. No, he said, according to Asa. Use the word. According to Natasha, if I may. According to Asa Kasher, the philosopher of the IDF. Yeah. He said that Netanyahu was avowing genocide. So he's an idiot. So the idiot. But he is past it. So the reason I raised the south african application is twofold. Hamas or no Hamas, it's exceptionally detailed on the question of. On the question of intent. And secondly, when the International Court of justice issues a ruling, individual justices have the right, can give their own opinion. And I found the german one to be the most interesting on this specific question, because he was basically saying that he didn't think South Africa presented a persuasive case, but he said their section on intent was so overpowering that he felt he was left with no choice but to vote with the majority. So I think that answers the intent part of your question. So, for the ICJ case that South Africa has brought, I think there's a couple things that need to be mentioned. One is, and I saw you two talk at length about this, the plausibility standard is incredibly low. The only thing we're looking for is a basic presentation of facts that make it conceivable possible that plausible, which legally, this is obviously below criminal conviction. Below? Yeah, below. Think of it as an indictment. Sure. Possibly, maybe even a lower level than even an indictment. So plausibility is an incredibly low standard, number one. Number two, if you actually go through and you read the complaint that South Africa filed, I would say that if you go through the quotes and you even follow through to the source of the quotes, the misrepresentation that South Africa does and their case about all of these horrendous quotes, in my opinion, borders on criminal. Well, 16 ICJ judges disagree. That's fine if 16 ICJ judges disagree, but I'm gonna give, you know, they could be. But even the american judge, she must have been awful incompetent if she was unable to see the misrepresentations that Mister Bonell, based on his Wikipedia entry, was able to find. So this is based on the official ICJ report that was released. I'm not sure if you read the entire. I read everything. Did you go through and actually identify any of the sources for the underlying question? Actually, brace yourself for this. And Moine could confirm it. Yaniv Kogan, an Israeli, and Jaime Stern Reiner, half Israeli. They checked every single quote in the Hebrew original. And Yaniv Kogin loved the guy. He has terrifying powers of concentration. He checked every single quote, is that correct? Maureen and Jamie checked every single quote in the English, in the context and where there were any contextual questions, they told us. I think they found one. Yeah, I think they found one. So I do not believe that those 1615 judges was 15 to 216 to two. I think they're 15 on the court plus two. So it's 17, so it's 15 to two. I don't think those 15 judges were incompetent. And I certainly don't believe the president of the court, an American, would allow herself to be duped. Okay. Because you might recall Mister Perrel, I. Think I'm gonna read one. Sure. So this was taken from the. From the south african complaint. Tons of these. But. So here's one. In the complaint for the ICJ, they said that on the 12 October 2023, President Isaac Herzog made clear that Israel was not distinguishing between militants and civilians in Gaza. Correct. Stating in a press conference to foreign media in relation to Palestinians in Gaza, over 1 million of whom are children, quote, quote, it's an entire nation out there that is responsible. It is not true, this rhetoric about civilians not aware, not involved. I saw that before. It's absolutely not true. And we will fight until we break their backbone. End quote. If you actually go to the news article that they even state, they even link it in their complaint, the full context for the quote was, quote, it is an entire nation out there that is responsible. It's not true, this rhetoric about civilians not being aware, not involved, it's absolutely not true. They could have risen up. They could have fought against that evil regime which took over Gaza in a coup d'etat. But we are at war. We are defending our homes. We are protecting our homes. That's the truth. And when a nation protects its home, it fights. And we will fight until we break their backbone. He acknowledged that many Gazans had nothing to do with Hamas, but was adamant that others did. Quote, I agree there are many innocent Palestinians who don't agree with this. But if you have a missile in your goddamn kitchen and you want to shoot it at me, am I allowed to defend myself? We have to defend ourselves. We have the right to do so. This is not the same as saying there's no deceit distinction between militants and civilians in Gaza. His statement here is actually fully compliant with international law to the letter. Because if you are storing military supplies in civilian areas, these things become military targets, and you're allowed to do proportionality assessments afterwards. So if this is supposed to be one of many quotes that they've shown, that is supposed to demonstrate genocidal intent, but it is very easily explained by military intent or by a conflict between two parties. I saw that press conference. Wait, let me just say something. All of this talk is a bit irrelevant because it sounds. It may sound to the listeners that the court in the HAG has ruled that Israel is committing genocide. No, I think it hasn't. No, it's just going in the next few years to look at the whole subject. There has been no. No determination at all. And as Stephen says, some of the quotes are not exactly accurate quotes or taken out of total mischaracterization. Okay. It is correct, as Moine put it, that it will be several years before the court makes a determination. And my guess is that it will determine there was no genocide. That's my guess, yes. No, I'm just giving you my guess. I can't predict. I got it all wrong. Actually, as Moine will attest, I got it all wrong the first time. I never thought the american judge would vote again in favor of plausibility. So you admit that you are wrong? Yeah, of course. I think I tell Moine twice a day, I was wrong about this and I was wrong about that. I'm not wrong about the facts. I try not to be. But my speculations, they can be wrong. Okay, leaving that aside, first of all, as Moine pointed out, there's a difference between the legal decision by the ruling and an independent judgment. Now, South Africa was not filing a frivolous case. That was 84 pages. It was single. Even 84 pages can be frivolous. It takes an hour and a half to read. It was not a massive case. It was single spaced and had literally hundreds of footnotes. Can still be frivolous with. It's possible, of course. Yeah. I read the report. To tell you the truth, I followed very closely everything that's been happening to October 7. I was mesmerized. I couldn't believe the comprehensiveness of that particular report. Number two, there are two quite respected judges. Excuse me. There were two quite respected experts of international law sitting on the south african panel. John Dugard and Vaughan Lowe. Vaughan Lowe, as you might know, he argued the war case in 2004 before the International Court of Justice. Now, they were not. They were alleging genocide, which in their view means the evidence in their minds. We're not yet at the court. The evidence in their minds compels the conclusion that genocide is being committed. I am willing, because I happen to know Mister Dugard personally and have correspond with von Low. I've heard their claim, I've read the report. I would say they make a very strong case. But let's agree plausible. Now here's a question. If somebody qualifies for an Olympic team, let's say a regional person qualifies for Olympic team, it doesn't mean they're going to be on the Olympic team. It doesn't mean they're going to win a gold medal, a silver medal or brown square. They can swim. That's what you're saying? No, I would say that's a very high bar. You're saying they can swim. To even qualify. Swim well enough to have a realistic prospect. Yeah. So to even make it to plausible. That is not the ego. That is not what plausible means. It is absolutely not. You're dead, Mister Borelli. Please don't teach me about the english language. So the declaration of judge, I said. Lawsuit in the present phase, qualifying. The court is not asked at this present phase of the proceedings to determine whether South Africa's allegations of genocide are well founded. They're not well founded. They're not even well founded. You said that plausible was a high standard. It is absolutely not. It is a misrepresentation of the strength of the case against Israel. Just like the majority of the quotes they have in this case are you. And also you said it was an extremely well founded case. They spend like one fourth of all of the quotations, some even pulled from the Goldstone report, that try to actually deal with the intent part. Which is, by the way, I think you guys, I don't know if you use the phrase the dolos specialis that the intentional part of genocide. I don't know that term. I think it's called dolos specialis. It is the most important part of genocide, which is proving the special. It is a highly special intent to commit genocide. It's possible that Israel could. No, the men's. Yes, I understand the state of mind, but in for genocide there is. It's called Dolores specialis. It's a highly special intent. Did you read the case? Yeah, it is highly special intent. I'm going to ask you again. Yes, please stop displaying your imbecility, okay? On public display that you're a moron. At least have the self possession to shut up. Did I read. I'm comfortable putting my display on camera. Putting yours in books. I read the case around four times. I read all of the majority opinion, the declarations. I read Aaron Barack's declaration. Then why are you lying and saying plausible is a high standard? Because I said even reaching the benchmark of plausibility is a very high standard in the world. It's the equivalent of a regional player qualifying for an Olympics. It's still two steps removed. You may not be on the team and you may not get a medal, but to get qualified, which in this context is the equivalent of plausible, you must be doing something pretty horrible. As it happens. As it happens. There was no dentist. That's what the court will rule. Remember what I just told you? The court rules rule. I don't expect to be even around when the court reaches its final decision. Why? It'll take a long, long time. Two years? No, I don't think they'll take two or three years. Bosnia, which was admittedly a special type of case because they were accusing Serbia of sponsoring the bosnian Serbs, that took, I think, 17 years from 90. I assume they'll take two or three years. But the point you're making. So this is illegal, horrible must be happening to even achieve horrible. It's a war. Yeah, it's true. Yeah. They weren't rendering a ruling on the war. They were rendering a ruling on the genocide. And I think, I think this suggests. That Israel is committing as well. Yeah. But I think the problem with, with your characterization is you're saying in so many words, South Africans basically only have to show up in court with a coherent statement. Right. That is correct. In today's atmosphere, that's probably. They needed to do a lot more. They need, they needed to, they needed, they need to persuade judges, go according. To what the majority want to hear. Yeah, but they need presidente. They needed to persuade the court that it was worth investing several years of their time in hearing. They're well paid whether they take this case or not. I mean, you know, they have a full docket whether they accept or reject this case. And I think, I don't think we should. Remember what I just said. They won't rule there was genocide. Remember what I said. Also, I recommend people actually read the case and follow through a lot of the quotes that they just don't show. Genocidal. The israeli minister of finance on the 8 October 2023. This is taken from the ICJ. This is from south african submission. Bizal Smotrik. I can't read this stated. There you go. Okay. At a meeting of the israeli cabinet, that, quote, we need to deal a blow that hasn't been seen in 50 years and take down Gaza, end quote. But again, if you click through and you read the source, their own linked source, it says, as per this own source, quote, the powerful finance minister, settler leader Bezalel Smotrek, I can't pronounce names demanded at the cabinet meeting late Saturday that the army, quote, hit Hamas brutally and not take the matter of the captives into significant consideration, end quote. Quote. In war, as in war, you have to be brutal. End quote. He was quoted as saying, quote, we need to deal a blow that hasn't been seen in 50 years and take down Gaza, end quote. You can't strip the quotation of Hamas, a NCD war with and then pretend. That there's genocidal intent, that's not genocide. So when the Ukrainians say, we Russia, that's not genocide. No. When Ukraine says, we need to defeat Russia, is that genocidal? Does that mean killing all russian citizens? Professor. Professor Morris, here's another one. When the defense. Ridiculous. Yes, ridiculous. The american judge, he also doesn't determine policy. The american judge, the american judge read. You are holding the american judge to. You know, she was the president. Facts of the matter. The american judge read several of the quotes. Look at the American Supreme Court today. They may support, Trump chose you. Professor Morris. Professor Morris, without going too far afield, if you heard a statement by the defense minister, the defense minister said, we are going to prevent any food, water, fuel or electricity from entering. Did Israel do that? Okay. No, I'm wondering what he said. I'm asking isn't israeli government, but we're talking about statements now, intent. How would you interpret that, speaker one. After 1200 of your citizens are murdered the way they were, I would expect extreme statements by lots of politicians, but. But you're. By lots of politics, but you don't accept extreme policy. But you don't accept what he said. Is an israeli policy. You don't. They let in order, they let in gas. You don't accept, you don't accept extreme palestinian statements after they lost their entire country, not just 1200 people. That's a good point. No, no. It's a good point. And on that, on that moment, brief moment of agreement. Let's just take a quick pause. We need a smoke break, water break, bathroom breakdown. Gaza is not a genocide. Russia is a genocide. War with Iraq and we wanted to destroy Iraq. That was a genocidal statement. There's a reason why genocide is so, is such an importantly guarded concept. And it's not to condemn every nation that goes to war. It made you into an italian all. The time by your solicitude for international law. You should try learning it sometime. It would help you sort out a lot of the civilian deaths. Unfortunately, 15 judges disagree. You could keep citing the judges. You should actually try reading the actual statements. This is tiring. You've invited us to a tiring session. Yeah. There you go. How you guys doing? Okay. Okay. There are major things to discuss here, not just what some court is doing and going to judge in two years time. Yes. Okay. So what you just said is my whole, one of the reasons why I feel so strongly about this particular conflict is because there are really important things to discuss, but they will never be discussed. They're not doing, we're not going to. Talk about like Area A, B and C or what, a transference of territory. Instead, we're going to talk about apartheid. We're not going to talk about the differences in how do you conduct war in an urban environment where people. We're just going to talk about genocide. We're not going to talk about what's a good solution. We're just going to say ethnic cleansing. Possible to be productive over the next 2 hours and talk about solutions. About solutions. I have no idea what to say. I mean, I don't see any solutions on. If you wanted a positive end to this discussion, which is what you said at the beginning, I can't contribute to that because I'm pessimistic. I don't see anywhere any way forward here. But the lack of the solution is easy. The reason why the solution is hard is because the histories and the myths are completely, there's a different factual record. One of the things it'd be good to talk about solutions. The future is going back in all the times it has failed every time. But even at that, we're probably not going to agree. He's going to say, you could write that. I can predict the whole line. He's going to say from 93 to 99. He's going to say is, didn't adhere to the Oslo Accords ever settlement expansion, continued raids happened into the West bank, that there was never a legitimate. That Netanyahu came in and violated the why memorandum, the transference. He's going to say all of this and he's not going to bring up anything that Palestinians said. And then for Camp David, he's going to say that. Yeah. That Arafat was trying, that the maps and the territorial exchange wasn't good enough, that they were asking Palestinians to make all the concessions that Israel would have made. Yeah. Well, lay it all up. Lay it up. You do talk quickly. Yeah, I know. Yeah. Anyhow, my future book should interest you guys. Oh, what are you working on? No, not working on it. It's actually going to come out. It deals with israeli and arab atrocities, war crimes, I call them, in the 48 war. Oh, really? Just deals with that subject. Is this because I know you've also talked about the closure of the archives and stuff. Well, it's, it's marginal. They do, it deals with that as well. But they have tried to seal off documents which had already used and seen, so now they don't let people see them. That's happened, but it's marginal in terms of its effect on. Were the british archives useful for you? For this new book. Well, for this list, it's mostly israeli archives. The British and the Americans and the UN did deal with these subjects, but not as well as israeli documents. What's your casualty count for Deir Yaser? It's about 100. I think there's agreement on that by Israelis and Arabs, 105, because before they were, they used to say 245 or 254. Those were the figures the British and the Arabs and the Haganah agreed on at the beginning because the Red Cross. I think, was the one that first put out that number. I don't remember. Maybe it was what's his name? Jacques de Reynier or maybe. Yeah, maybe he came up with that number, but it was just, he didn't count. They didn't count bodies. They just threw the number out. And everybody was happy to blame the Irgun and the lehi for, you know, killing more Arabs than actually. Well, and they put it to good use as well. Well, they said that it helped to precipitate more evacuation. So they were think beginning as memoirs. They also used that number. Yeah. So first of all, thank you for that heated discussion about the present. I would love to go back into history in a way that informs what we can look for in a, as a, by way of hope for the future. So when has, in Israel and Palestine have we been closest to something like a peace settlement, to something that, like, where both sides would be happy and enable the flourishing of both peoples? Well, from my knowledge of the 120 years or so of conflict, the closest I think the two sides have been to reaching some sort of settlement appears to have been in the year 2000, when Barack, and then subsequently Clinton offered a two state settlement to PLO, Palestinian Authority chairman Yasser Arafat. And Arafat seemed to waver. He didnt immediately reject what was being offered, but ultimately came down at the end of Camp David in July 2000. He came down against the proposals. And Clinton, who said he wouldnt blame him, later, blamed Arafat for bringing down the summit and not reaching a solution there. But I think there on the table, certainly in the Clinton parameters of December 2000, which followed the proposals by Barak in July, the Palestinians were offered the best deal they're ever going to get from Israel unless Israel is destroyed, and then they'll just be a palestinian arab state. But the best deal that Israel could ever offer them, they were offered, which essentially was 95% of the West Bank, East Jerusalem, half of the old city of Jerusalem, some sort of joint control of the Temple Mount and the Gaza Strip, of course, in full. And the Palestinians said no to this deal. And nobody really knows why Arafat said no. That is, some people think he was trying to hold out for slightly better terms. But my reading is that he was constitutionally, psychologically incapable of signing off on a two state deal, meaning acceptance of the existence of a jewish state. This was really the problem of Israel. Or of a jewish state? Of a jewish state. The jewish state of Israel. He wasn't willing to share Palestine with the Jews and put his name to that. I think he just couldn't do it. That's my reading. But some people say it was because the terms were insufficient and he was willing, but was waiting for slightly better terms. I don't buy that. I don't think so. But other people disagree with me on this. What do you think? Well, just briefly, in response, Arafat formally recognized Israel in 1993. Earlier, I don't think, actually that in 2000, 2001, a genuine resolution was on offer because I think the maximum Israel was prepared to offer, admittedly more than it had been prepared to offer in the past, fell short of the minimum that the Palestinians considered to be a reasonable two state settlement. Bearing in mind that as of 1949, Israel controlled 78% of the British Mandate of Palestine, the Palestinians were seeking a state on the remaining 22%. And this was apparently too much for Israel. My response to your question would be, wait, wait. They were being offered something like 22 or 21%. They were being offered, I think, less than a withdrawal to the 1967 borders with mutual and minor and reciprocal land swaps. And the just resolution of the refugee. Problem was one of the questions. Yes. You know, I worked for a number of years with International Crisis group, and my boss at the time was Rob Malley, who was one of the american officials present in captain thrown out of the State Department. Whatever. The point I want to make about Rob was he wrote, I think, a very perceptive article in 2001 in the New York Review Books. I know that you and Ehud Barakdeen have had a debate with them, but I think he gives a very compelling reason of why and how Camp David failed. But rather than going into that, I'll. You wrote that together with Hussein Ara. Hussein Ara, yes. Who was not at Camp David. Yes. But in response to your question, I think there could have been a real possibility of israeli palestinian and arab israeli peace in the mid 1970s, in the wake of the 1973 October war. I'll recall that in 1971, Moshe Dayan, Israel's defense minister at the time, full of triumphalism about Israel's victory in 1967, speaking to a group of israeli military veterans stated, if I had to choose between Sharm el Sheikh without peace or peace without Sharmeshech, this is referring to the resort in Egyptian Seiner, which was an under israeli occupation. Dayan said, I will choose for Sharma Sheikh without peace. Then the 1973 war came along and I think israeli calculations began to change very significantly. And I think it was in that context that had there been a joint us soviet push for an arab israeli and israeli palestinian resolution that incorporated both an israeli withdrawal to the 1967 lines and the establishment of a palestinian state in the occupied territories, I think there was a very reasonable prospect for that being achieved. It ended up being aborted, I think, for several reasons. And ultimately the egyptian president, Anwar Sadat, decided, for reasons we can discuss later, to launch a separate unilateral initiative for israeli egyptian rather than arab israeli peace. And I think once that set in motion, the prospects disappeared because Israel essentially saw its most powerful adversary removed from the equation and felt that this would give it a free hand in the occupied territories, also in Lebanon, to get rid of the PLO and so on. So you ask, when were we closest? And I can't give you an answer of when we were closest. I can only tell you when I think we could have been close. And that was a lost opportunity. If we look at the situation today, there's been a lot of discussion about a two state settlement. My own view, and I've written about this, I dont buy the arguments of the naysayers that we have passed the so called point of no return with respect to a two state settlement. Certainly if you look at the israeli position in the occupied territories, I would argue its more tenuous than was the french position in Algeria in 1954, than was a british position in Ireland in 1962, than was the ethiopian position in Eritrea in 1990. And so as a matter of practicality, as a matter of principle, I do think the establishment of a palestinian state in the occupied territories remains realistic. I think the question that we now need to ask ourselves, it's one I'm certainly asking myself since October 7 and looking at Israel's genocidal campaign, but also looking at larger questions, is it desirable? Can you have peace with what increasingly appears to be an irrational, genocidal state that seeks to confront and resolve each and every political challenge with violence and that reacts to its failure to achieve solutions to political challenges with violence by applying even more violence that has an insatiable lust for palestinian territory, that a genocidal apartheid state that seems increasingly incapable of even conceiving of peaceful coexistence with the other people on that land. So I'm very pessimistic that a solution is possible. I look at. I grew up in western Europe in the long shadow of the second world war. I think we can all agree that there could have been no peace in Europe had certain regimes on that continent not been removed from power. I look at Southeast Asia in the late 1970s, and I think we're all agreed that there could not have been peace in that region had the Khmer Rouge not been ousted. I look at southern Africa during the 1990s, and I think we can all be agreed that had the white minority regimes that ruled Zimbabwe and South Africa not been dismantled, there could not have been peace in that region. And although I think it's worth having a discussion, I do think it's now a legitimate question to ask. Can there be peace without dismantling the zionist regime? And I make a very clear distinction between the israeli state and its institutions, on the one hand, and the israeli people, who I think, regardless of our discussion about the history, I think you can now talk about an israeli people and the people that have developed rights over time, and a formula for peaceful coexistence with them will need to be found, which is a separate matter from dismantling the israeli state and its institutions. And again, I haven't reached clear conclusions about this except to say, as a practical matter, I think a two state settlement remains feasible. But I think there are very legitimate questions about its desirability and about whether peace can be achieved in the Middle east with the persistence of an irrational, genocidal apartheid regime, particularly because israeli society is beginning to develop many extremely, extremely distasteful, supremacist, dehumanizing aspects that I think also stand in the way of coexistence that are being fed by this regime. So if you look back into history when we were closest to peace and do you draw any hope from any of them? I feel like in 2000, I feel like the deal that was present, at least at the end of the Taba summit, I think in terms of what Israel, I think, had the appetite to give and what the Palestinians would have gotten, would have definitely been the most agreeable between the two parties. I don't know if in 73, I'm not sure if the appetite would have ever been there for the arab states to negotiate alongside the Palestinians. I know that in Jordan there was no love for the Palestinians after 1970, after black September. I know that Sadat had no love for the Palestinians due to their association with the Muslim Brotherhoods, attempted assassinations in Egypt. Sorry, which Plo and the Muslim Brotherhood. Sadat was upset because there were attempted assassinations by people in. Oh, no, an assassination. It was a personal friend of his, Yusuf al Sibai. I can't pronounce that. He was assassinated by Cyprus, by a Palestinian. He was killed by the Abu Nidal organization. Sure. Yeah. Admittedly, yeah. He says as much belongs to his senior group, not PLO directly. But I think that there was a history of the Palestinians sometimes fighting with their neighboring states that were hosting them if they weren't getting the political concessions they wanted. The assassination of the jordanian king in 51 might be another example of that. In Jordan. It feels like over a long period of time, it feels like the Palestinians have been kind of told from the neighboring arab states that if they just continue to enact violence, whether in Israel or abroad, that eventually a state will materialize. Somehow I don't think it's gotten them any closer to a state. If anything, I think it's taken them farther and farther and farther away from one. And I think as long as the hyperbolic language is continually employed internationally, the idea that Israel is committing a genocide, the idea that there is an apartheid, the idea that they live in a concentration camp, all of these words. I think further the narrative for the Palestinians that Israel is an evil state that needs to be dismantled. I mean, you said as much about the institution, at least to the zionist government. Israel's government is probably not going anywhere. All of the other surrounding arab states have accepted that, or at least most of them down in the Gulf, Egypt and Jordan have accepted that. The Palestinians need to accept it, too. The israeli state, where the state apparatus is not going anywhere. And at some point they need to realize, like, hey, we need a leader that's going to come out and represent us, represent all of us, is willing to take political risks, is willing to negotiate some lasting peace for us. And it's not going to be the international community or some invocation of international law or some invocation of morality or justice that's going to extricate us from this conflict. It's going to take some actual difficult political maneuvering on the ground of accepting Israel. Of accepting Israel. Which they formally did in 1993. Which they formally did in 1993. Yeah, but then no lasting peace came after that in 2000. No, because 1993 was not a peace agreement. Sure, the Oslo Accords weren't a final. Solution, were an interim agreement, and Palestinians actually began clamoring for commencing the permanent status resolutions on schedule. And the Israelis kept delaying them. In fact, they only began, I believe in 99 under american pressure on the Israelis. I think you're being a bit one sided. Both sides didn't fulfill the promise of Oslo and the steps needed for Oslo. There was palestinian terrorism, which accompanied Israel's expansion of settlements and other things. The two things fed each other and led to what happened in 2000, which was a breakdown of the talks altogether when the Palestinians said no. But I think there's a. I don't agree, incidentally, with this definition of Israel or the israeli state as apartheid. It's not. There is some sort of apartheid going on in the West bank. The israeli regime itself is not an apartheid regime. That is nonsense by any definition of apartheid, which. Well, by the formal definition, I think it qualifies. No, it doesn't qualify. Apartheid is a race based distinction between different segments of the population. And some of them don't have any representation at all, like the blacks in South Africa, no rights at all in Israel itself, the minority, the Arabs do have representation, do have rights and so on. I don't think Israel is also genocidal. I don't think it's been genocidal. It wasn't so in 48, it wasn't so in 67. And it hasn't been recently, in my view. And talk about dismantling Israel and that's what you're talking about is, I think Stephen said it correctly, is counterproductive. It just pushes Israelis further away from willing to give Palestinians anything. Please, Norm, tell me you have something optimistic. Optimistic to say. Even though I agree. I've thought about it a lot and I agree with Moines analysis. I'm not really in the business of punditry. I rather look at the historical record where I feel more comfortable and I feel on terra firma. So I'd like to just go through that. I don't quite. I agree. And I disagree with Moin on the 73 issue. After the 1973 war, it was clear that Israel was surprised by what happened during the war and it took a big hit. The estimates are. I don't know what numbers you use, but I hear between two and 3000 israeli soldiers were killed during the 19 hundreds. It was 2527 hundred. Yeah. Okay, so I got it right here. I read different numbers. That's, you know, it's a very large number of Israelis who were killed. There were moments at the beginning of the war where there was a fear that this might be it. No, there wasn't. There wasn't. No. This is not everybody forgets Israel's atomic weaponry. I know, but. So how could they have been? Didn't Diane talk about the collapse of the third temple? He did, but it was hysterical and silly. Israel had atomic weapons. They wanted to stop Syrians or the Egyptians. But we're talking about perceptions. I can't tell you if he was hysterical or not. No, he wasn't in the same room with him for a day. He was. But I'm just saying let's not bog down on that. The war is over and when President Carter comes into power. Carter was an extremely smart guy, Jimmy Carter, extremely smart guy. And he was very fixed on details, extreme. He, he was probably the most impressive of modern american presidents, in my opinion, by a wide margin. And he was determined to resolve the conflict on a big scale, on the arab israeli scale. On the palestinian issue, he wouldn't go past what he called a palestinian homeland. He wouldn't. Palestinian national home. The palestinian national home. He wouldn't go as far as a palestinian state. I'm not going to go into the details of that. I don't think realistically, given the political balance of forces that was going to happen. But that's a separate issue. Let's get to the issue at hand, namely, what is the obstacle or what has been the obstacle since the early 1970s. Since roughly 1974, the Palestinians have accepted the two state settlement and the June 1967 border. Now, as it got, as more pressure was exerted on Israel because the Palestinians seemed reasonable, the Israelis, to quote the israeli political scientist Avner Yaniv, he since passed from the scene. He said, Yaniv, in his book, Dilemmas of security, he said that the big palestinian, big israeli fear was what he called the palestinian peace offensive. That was their worry, that the Palestinians were becoming to moderate. And unless you understand that, you can't understand the June 1982 Lebanon war. The purpose of the June 1982 Lebanon war was to liquidate the PLO in southern Lebanon because they were too moderate. The palestinian peace offensive. I'm going to have to fast forward. There are many events. There's the first Intifada, then there's the Oslo accord. And let's now go to the heart of the issue, namely the 2000 2001 negotiations. Well, the negotiations are divided into three parts for the sake of listeners. There's Camp David in July 2000. There are the Clinton parameters in December 2000. And, and then there are negotiations in Taba in Egypt, Taba in Egypt in 2001. Those are the three phases. Now I have studied the record probably to the point of insanity, because there are so many details you have to master. I'll vouch for that. The insanity part, actually, I will vouch for it. I will personally vouch for it. There is one extensive record from that whole period, from 2000 to, you could say, 2007, and that is what came to be called the Palestine papers, which are about 15,000 pages of all the records of the negotiations. I have read through all of them, every single page. And this is what I find. If you look at Shlomo Ben Amis book, which I have with me prophets without honor. It's his last book. He says, going into Camp David, that means July. Going into Camp David, July 2000. He said the Israelis were willing to return about not return, but will withdraw from 90, relinquished 92% of the West Bank. Ben Amy was at Cam David. Yeah, he was at Taba. Oh, yeah. He was also captivated. They wanted, Israel wanted to keep all the major settlement blocks. It wanted to keep roughly 8% of the West bank. They were allowing for. You put it at 84% to 90% in your books. They put it at roughly 92%. Israel was willing to give up. How you calculate what stage Camp David. Because there were two weeks. I'll get to that. Proposals change during the war. So Israel wants to keep all the major settlement blocks. Means the border area of the west. Well, not the border. We have Ariel, we have male Adumim, we have, as Condoleezza Rice called Ariel. She said it was a dagger into the heart of the west bank. So they want to keep 8% of the land. They want to keep the settlement blocks. They want to keep 80% of the settlers. They will not budge an inch of on the question of refugees, to quote Ehud Barak in the article he co authored with you in the New York Review of Books, we will accept, and I think the quote is accurate, no moral, legal, or historical responsibility for what happened to the refugees. So forget about even allowing refugees to return. We accept no moral, legal or historical responsibility for the refugees. And on Jerusalem, they wanted to keep large parts of Jerusalem. Now, how do we judge who is reasonable and who is not? Ben Ami says, I think the israeli offer was reasonable. That's how he sees it. But what is the standard of reasonable? My standard is, what does international law say? International law says the settlements are illegal. Israel wants to keep all the settlement blocks. 15 judges. All 15. In the war decision in 2004, in July 2004, all 15 judges, including the american judge Bergen Thal, ruled the settlements are illegal. Under international law, they want to keep 80% of the settlers. Under international law, all the settlers are illegal in the West bank. They want to keep large parts of East Jerusalem. But under international law, East Jerusalem is occupied palestinian territory. That's what the international. Okay. There's never been a palestinian state. How could it be palestinian? I listen patiently to you. Sorry. Under international law, if you read the decision, all territory. They're not. 2004 wall decision, all territory beyond the Green Line, which includes East Jerusalem, is occupied palestinian territory. The designated unit, according to the International Court of Justice, the designated unit for palestinian self determination. And they deny any right whatsoever on the right of return. The maximum, I don't want to go into the details now. The maximum formal offer was by Ehud Omar in 2008. He offered 5000 refugees could return under what was called family reunification. 5000 in the course of five years and no recognition of any israeli responsibility. So if you use as the baseline what the UN general assembly has said and what the International Court of Justice has said, if you use that baseline, international law, by that baseline, all the concessions came from the palestinian side. Every single concession came from the palestinian side. None came from the israeli side. They may have accepted less than what they wanted, but it was still beyond what international law allocated to them. Now you say allocated to the Palestinians? Allocated to Palestinians, yes. Thank you for the clarification. Now about Arafat. Like the mufti never liked the guy. I think that was one of the only disagreements Moween and I had when Arafat passed. You were a little sentimental. I was not. Never liked the guy. But politics, you don't have to like the guy. There was no question, nobody argues it, that whenever the negotiations started up, the Palestinians just kept saying the same things. No. They kept saying, no, no, Professor Morris, with due respect, incorrect. They kept saying, international legitimacy, international law, UN resolutions. They said, we already gave you what the law required. We gave that in 1988, November 1988, and then ratified again at Oslo in 1993. And they said, now we want what was promised us under international law. And that was the one point where everybody on the other side agreed. Clinton, don't talk to me about international law, Livny. During the Omar administration, she said, I studied international law. I don't believe in international law. Every single member on the other side, they didn't want to hear from international law. And to my thinking that that is the only reasonable baseline for trying to resolve the conflict. And Israel has, along with when has. International law been relevant to any conflict in the world over the last hundred years? That's why the Palestinians have to recognize Israel, because that's international law. That was UN resolution 242. International law, or in accordance with international law. Professor Morris, for argument's sake, let's agree on that. Strictly for argument's sake, what's the alternative? Dennis Ross said, we're going to decide who gets what on the basis of needs. So he says Israel needs this, Israel needs that. Israel needs that. Dennis Ross decided to be the philosopher king. He's going to decide on the basis of needs. Well, if you asked me, since Gaza is one of the densest places on earth, it needs. Needs part of Sinai. That's what it actually needs. Okay? I don't even want to go there. It needs a nice big chunk, but I have to accept. International law says no, okay, international law is irrelevant. Now, Bellamy says, I think the israeli offer was reasonable. Okay, that's. And he's a reasonable guy. That's here. He seems, even though, okay, I don't want to go there. I've debated him and partly agree with you, but who decides what's reasonable? I think the international community in its political incarnation, the general assembly, the Security Council, all those UN Security Council resolutions saying the settlements are illegal, annexation of east Jerusalem is null and void, and the International Court of Justice, that to me is a reasonable standard. And by that standard the Palestinians were asked to make concessions which I consider unreasonable or the international community considers unreasonable. I think that the issue is when you apply international law or international standards, I wouldn't say what Benny Moore says, that they're irrelevant, but I think that these have to be seen as informing the conversation. I don't think these are the final shape of the conversation. I don't think historically Israel has ever negotiated within the strict bounds whether we're talking resolution 242, whether we're talking about any general assembly resolutions. That's just not how these negotiations tend to go. You might consider international opinion on things, but at the end of the day, it's the bilateral negotiations oftentimes historically started in secret, independent of the international community, that end up shaping what the final agreements look like. I think the issue with this broad appeal to international law is, again, going back to my earlier point about all of the euphemistic words. All it simply does is drive palestinian expectations up to a level that is never going to be satisfied. For instance, you can throw that ICJ opinion all you want. It was an advisory opinion that came in 2004. Have Palestinians gained more or less land since that 2004 advisory opinion was issued? So what would your standard be then? Both sides have to have a delegation that confronts each other and they assess the realistic conditions on the ground and they try to figure out, within the contrast, fines of international law are reasonable for. But like, for instance, this statement of like full retreat from the West bank. What is it, 400,000 settlers. How many settlers live in the West bank now? Probably half a million. Yeah. You're going to depend if you include. The Jerusalem suburbs, four or 500,000 people. Are never with the Jerusalem suburbs. Perhaps, yeah. Half a million people. Jerusalem, not settlements. I know that, but that's not what the law, the law calls it null and void. Let me. We can say. We can say whatever we want until we're blue in the face, but, like, there's half a million israeli people are not being expelled from waste. My response, you're basically saying, if I understand correctly, there's only one way to resolve this and that is through direct bilateral negotiations. Probably, yeah. Okay, so. Or ideally, but I've taken over your house. Okay. You're not going to go to the police because you know the law is of only of limited value. So you come over and sit in what is now my living room. That used to be your living room, and we negotiate. The problem there is that you're not going to get anything unless I agree to it and standards and norms and law and all the rest of it be damned. So you need to take into account that when you're advocating bilateral negotiations that effectively, that gives each of the parties veto power. And in the current circumstances, the Palestinians have already recognized Israel. They have. You keep bringing that up like it's a significant concession. It's not even true. The recognition from Palestine isn't doing anything for Hamas. Totally rejected. I'm not talking about Hamas is the. Majority among the palestinian people. They won the elections in 2006. Every major. Actually, they won a majority of the seats. Yes, exactly. They didn't win a majority of the votes. Every opinion poll today says the majority of Palestinians support the Hamas. That sounds. The Hamas absolutely rejects Israel. So if Arafat, 1993 or whatever, issued a sort of recognition. It wasn't a sort of recognition, okay. A recognition of Israel. It doesn't. It's meaningless. It's meaningless. It's meaningless. Anyhow. I don't believe that Arafat was sincere about it. Does it matter what you or I think? Well, most Israelis do, and that does matter. Okay, so matter. But Hamas says no and Hamas is the majority. So for years. So for years, the Israeli and us demand was that the Palestinians recognize 242338. They did. But you're saying, okay, we demanded that they do this, but it was meaningless when they did it. Then the demand was that tactical thing. Yes. Then the demand was the PLO recognize Israel tactical. Okay. We demanded that they did this. And they did it, but it's meaningless. And they never changed their charter, the PLO, you may remember that. In fact, they supposedly abrogated the old charter but never came up with a new one. No. So no new charter in 1996. And Farooq Kadumi said, of course, the whole charter is still in force. Yes, but the point is, the Palestinians demands are constantly made of them. And when they exceed to those demands, they're then told, actually, what you did is meaningless. So here's a new set of demands. I mean, you know, it's like a hamster. There's no new set of demands. It's like a hamster. It's like a hamster. Let me tell you what. No, no. Let me tell you what that will be told. If you run fast enough, you'll get out of the cave. No, no. The bottom line is that Israel would like a palestinian, sadat. It wants the Palestinians. Listen, listen. It's really a worst case scenario, okay, let me just. Because the shots are that. But anyhow, the Israelis want, for good reason, want the Palestinians. Israelis want the Palestinians to actually accept the legitimacy of the state of Israel and design this project and then live side by side with them in two states. That's what the Israelis. I don't even know if this is true today. And what is the formal position of this israeli government? No, no. I'm saying I don't know if it exists. Okay, it's pre, it's predecessor. And it's predecessor. And its predecessor. Come on. That's what Israelis want. Change of psyche among the Palestinians. If that doesn't happen, there won't be a Palestinian. Moine has an interesting point. Because I found. I found, I know you want to. I know you want to forget it. Just like you want to forget the genocide charge. I know you want to forget that. Well, the Palestinians want to forget it too. And it doesn't suit them as well. But here's the problem. And it's exactly the problem that Moine just brought up. Now, I read carefully your book, one state, two states. With all due respect, absolutely a disgrace. Coming. Coming from you, coming from you. Most reviewers didn't agree with you. Yeah, coming from you was like you wrote it in your sleep. It's nothing compared to what you wrote before. I don't know why you did it. In my opinion, you ruined your reputation. Not totally, but you undermined it with that book. But let's get to the issue that Moween wrote. Here's what you said. You said formally, you said, yes, it's true. The Palestinians recognize Israel. But then you said, viscerally, in their hearts, they don't. They didn't really recognize Israel. So I thought to myself, how does Professor Morrison chest. No. What's in the hearts of Palestinians? I don't know. I was explained. I was surprised, as a historian. Historian. You would be talking about what's lurking in the hearts of Palestinians. But then you said something which was really interesting. You said, even if in their hearts, they accepted Israel, you said, quote, rationally, they could never accept Israel because they got nothing. They had this beautiful Palestine, and now they're reduced to just a few pieces, a few parcels of land. So they will never accept it. So, yes. So you said there's no way they can accept it. No, I would say that as well. Yeah. The two states of proposal doesn't make any sense. Exactly. As Moine said. You keep moving the goalposts. No, no. Until we reach the point where we realize, according to Benny Morris, there can't be a solution. So why don't you just say that outright? Why don't you say it outright? They're according to you, the Palestinians can never be reasonable because according to you. They want all of Palestine. You're according to you, they couldn't possibly. They couldn't possibly agree to a two state summit because it's such a lousy settlement. Because they want you all to Palestine because you. But you said rationally, they couldn't accept it. Not their feelings. It's both. You said rational. You went from formally, viscerally. Rationally. So now we're reaching the point where, according to Benny Morris, the Palestinians can't be reasonable because reasonably, they have to reject two states. They want all of Palestine. That's absolutely correct. There's no way to resolve the problem, according to your logic. Well, Palestine. He said that himself. He said they should dismantle Israel. That's what he's saying. What I said, what I said. And I've written. I'm glad you didn't deny it. I've written extensively on this issue, on why a two state settlement is still feasible, and I came out in support of that proposition. Perhaps in my heart, you know, you can see that I was just bullshitting, but that's what I actually wrote. That was a number of years ago, and just as a matter of historical record, beginning in the early 1970s, there was fierce debate within the palestinian national movement about whether to accept or reject. And there were three schools of thought. There was one that would accept nothing less than the total liberation of Palestine. There was a second that accepted what was called the establishment of a fighting national Authority on palestinian soil, which they saw as the beginning as a springboard for the total liberation of Palestine. And there was a third school that believed that under current dynamics and so on, that they should go for a two state settlement. And our friend and correspondent Kauter Loewerse has written a very perceptive article on when the PLO, ready in 1976, came out in open support of a two state resolution at the Security Council, PLO accepted it. Israel, of course, rejected it, but the resolution didn't pass because the US and the UK vetoed it. It was both of them. I think it was nine to five. Ah, okay. Yeah. But fact of the matter is that the PLO came to accept a two state settlement. Why they did it, I think is irrelevant. And subsequently the PLO acted on the basis of seeking to achieve a two state settlement. The reason I think, and I think Norm, you've written about this, the reason that Arafat was so insistent on getting minimally acceptable terms for a two state settlement at Camp David and afterwards was precisely because he knew that once he signed, that was all the Palestinians were going to get. If his intention had been, I'm not accepting Israel, I simply want to springboard, he would have accepted a palestinian state in Jericho, but he didn't. That's something I've never understood. He should have logically accepted the springboard and then from there launched his next state. He should have done that. International law would put a real constraint on him. No, but once he accepted it was over, constitutionally, he was incapable of signing. He should have accepted it. But if you're correct, okay, that he was really out to eliminate Israel, then he wouldn't have cared about the borders, he wouldn't have cared about what the thing said about refugees. He would have gotten a sovereign state and used that to achieve that purpose. But I think it was precisely because he recognized that he was not negotiating for a springboard, he was negotiating permanent status, that he was such a stickler about the details. The second, just as a factual matter, he wasn't such a stickler. When they asked him how many refugees, the numbers. It was a principle rather than the principal. The principle, he said, I would be pragmatic about it. And the numbers that were used at Annapolis were between 100 and 250,000 refugees over ten years. That was the number Arafat, when he was asked at Camp David, he kept saying, I care about the Lebanese, the palestinian refugees in Lebanon, which came to about 300 priority, which was a large concession from whether you accept the number or not, that he wasn't talking about 6 million, he was talking about between 100 and 250,000 over ten years. Now, the best offer that came from the Palestinians, excuse me, the best offer that came from Israel was the Omar offer. Can we just pretend like we didn't all lay out the exceptionally pessimistic view of a two state, hold on a second to stay solution. Let's pretend that in five years, in ten years, a two state peace settlement is reached, and as historians, you'll still be here and writing about it 20 years from now. How would it have happened? I think that historically, I think that the big issue is, I think that both sides have had their own internal motivations to fight because they feel like they have something to gain from it. But I think as time has gone on, unfortunately, the record proves that the palestinian side is delusional. The longer that the conflict endures, the worse position they'll be in. But for some reason, they've never had a leader that convinced them of that as much that Arafat thought that if he held on, there was always a better deal around the corner. Abbas is more concerned with trying to maintain any legitimacy amongst Palestinians than actually trying to negotiate anything realistic with Israel. That Palestinians are always incentivized to feel like as long as they keep fighting, either the international community is going to save them with the 5,000,000th UN resolution condemning whatever, that another ICJ advisory opinion is finally going to lead to the expulsion of half a million Jews from the West bank, or that some other international body, the ICJ and the genocide charge, is going to come and save the Palestinians, as long as they in their mind, feel like somebody is coming to save them, then they feel like they're going to have the ability to get something better in the future. But the reality is, is all of the good partners for peace that the Palestinians had have completely and utterly abandoned them. Egypt, Jordan, the Gulf states, whether you're talking bilateral peace or the Abraham accords, most of the arab leaders in negotiating peace with Israel have just not had as much of an interest in maintaining the rights and the representations of what the palestinian people want. And the only people they have today to draw legitimacy from Orlando, to have on their side to argue with them, are people that, I guess, write books or tweet or people in the international community that do resolutions or Amnesty international reports. And the reality is we can scream until we're blue in the face on these things. None of it has gotten any closer to helping the Palestinians in any sense of the word. The condition has only gotten worse. The settlements only continue to expand. The military operations are only to get more brutal. The blockade is going to continue to have worse effects as long as we use international law as the basis. And there isn't a strong, a sadat like palestinian leader that's willing to come up and confront Israel with the brave, peaceful negotiations to force them to acquiesce, nothing is going to happen. And I think that the issue you come up with is whether it's people like norm that talk about how brave the October 7 attacks were or how much respect they have for those fighters, Israel, in a way, and I think people have said as much about Netanyahu, the right wants violence from the Palestinians because it always gives them a perpetual excuse to further the conflict. Well, we have to go in and, and October 7, we've got a room of Hamas. Well, we can't trust these people in the west. We have to do the night raids because the second intifada made us feel like the palestinian people didn't want trust with us. I feel like the biggest thing that would force Israel to change its path would be an actual, a real, not for like two weeks, but an actual peaceful palestinian leader, somebody committed to peace that is able to apply those standards and hold the entire region of Palestine to those standards. Because I think over time, the mounting pressure from, without the international community and the mounting pressure from within, because Israel hosts a lot of its own criticism. If we talk about Bet Salem, Doggone, Israel will host a lot of its own criticism. I think that that pressure would force Israel towards an actual peace agreement, but it's never going to come through violence. Historically, it hasn't. And in the modern day, violence has just hurt the Palestinians more and more. If you paint a picture of the future, now is a good moment for both Palestine and Israel to get new leadership. Netanyahu's on the way out. Hamas possibly is on the way out. Who should rise to the top such that a peaceful settlement can be reached? The problem is, like Benny said, yeah, it's difficult because Hamas enjoys so much widespread support amongst the palestinian people. I think that the. Well, I don't know. There's opinions on whether democracy or pushing them towards elections was the right or wrong idea. But with, like an islamic fundamentalist government for Hamas, I don't know if a negotiation with Israel ever happens there. And then when the international pressure is always 67 borders, infinite right of return for refugees, and a total withdrawal of Israel from all these lands to even start negotiations. I just don't see realistically on the palestinian side. No negotiations are ever going to start in a place that Israel is willing to accept. If you want to dismiss international law, that's fine, but then you have to do it consistently. You can't set standards for the Palestinians, but reject applying those standards to Israel. If we're going to have the law of the jungle, then we can all be beasts. And not only some of us. And I think so it's either that or you have certain agreed standards that, that are intended to regulate our conduct, all of our conduct, not just some of us. So that's what I'm saying. To abandon. Well, you're saying, you know international law and the millionth UN resolution. You're being very dismissive about all this. Well, I'm saying, and that's fine, but. Then you have to be dismissive. Like for instance, across the board. That was a chapter six resolution. That's non binding. But two four two binding. Absolutely not. What is, what is binding? Do you know anything about how the UN system works? If you read the language of the resolution, binding is typically commits you to upholding a particular international law or for. The statistics, you just throw out words you hear. Binding this 242 even does two four two mention a palestinian state norm? Of course, that's part of the problem. That was the reason why the Palestinians didn't want to recognize 242, because they only referred at the very end 181. And 242 when they were. Yeah, but hold on, hold on. Every United Nations Security Council resolution, irrespective of, under which chapter it was adopted, is by definition binding. Binding not only on the members of the Security Council, but on every member state of the UN. That's read the UN charter. It's black and white people. Look, now, regarding the language, even of 242 is kept intentionally vague such that it doesn't actually provide. Again, the final context is not that. Vague because the term land for peace originates. And 242, the idea is territorial acquisition. And Israel's need to give it up was kept vague. That's why in 79, Israel saw that they fulfilled their obligations under 242. Allow me points of information. The first principle in UN resolution 242 is the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, which is meaningless. It may be meaningless to you, mister. Meaningless to everyone, Mister Bono. That principle was adopted by the friendly nations resolution, the UN General assembly, in 1970. That resolution was then reiterated in the International Court of Justice ruling advisory opinion in 2004. That was the basis of the coalition against Iraq when it acquired Kuwait, and then declared it a province of Kuwait, whichever. That's what's called. That's what's true. I'm not going to go there. I'm not going to go there. It's not accurate that Arafat endorsed. Okay. I'm not going to go there. Okay. International law. Use kogans or peremptory norms of international law. The inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war. That is not controversial. It's not vague. You couldn't put it more succinctly. You cannot acquire territory by force under international law. On the West bank before 67. Who. Mister Bennell, don't change the subject if you don't know what you're talking about. At least. At least have the humility you talk about. How close is 242 got? How close has 242 gotten to the. Palestinians to peace from tweet five? You have no idea what you're talking about. It's just so embarrassing. At least have some humility between us who have read maybe 10,000 books on the topic and you've read two Wikipedia entries and you start talking about chapter six. Do you know what chapter seven is? You know what chapter. Answer the question. How close is 242 gotten the Palestinians to a state? How close is the 2004 advisory opinion gotten the West bank settlement? What's your alternative? The alternative is not this, whatever this making money off the conflict is the actual alternative. The actual alternative. You go and talk. To 50 million different people. The issue is you have all these. Resolutions have gotten the Palestinians. No, the state, because they have here. Earlier because of the US veto. They're not going to be enforced. Wait, wait, wait. Okay, if I may. You know what, Professor Morris? For genocide, Professor Morris, because of your logic, and I'm not disputing it. That's why October 7 happened. Oh, my God. Because there was no options left for those people. Exactly. What now? Options are left after. This is now an expert on palestinian mentality. You're contradicting yourself. Necessary to negotiate. Jordan didn't find it necessary. Negotiate. Piece of the Palestinians. Everybody. Wait. You're contradicting yourself. On the one hand, you're saying all the Palestinians do is fight and violence and terrorism and all the rest of it. But on the other hand, you're saying they're expecting salvation from UN resolutions and international court. Those aren't violent. No, but it's part of maintaining, it's the continual putting off of negotiating any solution they've negotiated. As in when Arafat respond. All over the world? Yes. I'm putting the conflict off two states. In 1975 braces. Accept the two state solutions. You can quote Arafat talking about how he's lying and he's just going to use in 94 and a 95 when he making trips around the world. There's a very rich starting ground. I'm sorry, I can. You can watch tv and slow down to 0.5 speed if you don't understand what I'm saying. Let me. There's a very, there's a very lengthy history of israeli palestinian negotiations. You want to deny that those negotiations. Took place where it feels like there was a good faith effort? Where there was a good faith effort? Where was a good faith effort in record, Mister Pop historical. You can't even read the written records. I don't know why you're referring to it. Excuse me? I just said there are 15,000 pages. On Annapolis and I'm sure you cherry quaked your favorite quote from all. Okay, that's great. That's great. At least I had a quote to cherry pick all you have and I. Ricky P. One I gave you. All you have is Wikipedia quotes. Find me the information. The palestinian cause has been furthered by any international law. Can't do it. Speaker one. I think the problem is, is different. Okay? You want to say the Palestinians were only fighting, and then when I point out they've also gone to the court and the UN say, well, all they do then is these things and they should be negotiating. And I demonstrate that there was a lengthy record of negotiations that, yeah, but they didn't go in good faith. Again, you're placing the hamster in the wheel and telling him if he runs fast enough, maybe one day he'll get out of the cage. What was the best. Okay, please, if I could just finish. I think the fundamental problem here is not what the Palestinians have and haven't done. And it's perfectly legitimate to have a discussion about whether they could have been more effective. Of course they could have been more effective. Everyone could have always been more effective. The fundamental issue here is that Israel has never been prepared to concede the legitimacy palestinian national rights in the land of the former british mandate of Palestine. How do you explain Taba summit? How do you explain the cap? David Olmert did. How do you explain of palestinian demands? This is. They just didn't want to give the Palestinians all of Palestine. That's all. No, all of Palestine. You mean all of the occupied territories? You're talking about all of Palestine. Wait, what is the occupied. What is the occupied territory? The occupied territory. All of Israel. The occupied territories are those territories that Israel occupied in June of 1966. Palestinians often use that term to define the whole of Palestine. Could you show me, not just the West bank, could you show me, Professor. Morris, in all the negotiations, all the negotiations and all the accounts that have been written, can you show me one where the Palestinians end the negotiations? Because that's what we were talking about. Wanted all of Israel the maximum. I can't say that because international community won't accept. So they didn't say it? They didn't ask? No, Hamas did. Hamas always said, Hamas, never. Hamas only negotiated with Israel about prisoner exchanges. A lot of the palestinian people, you. Will agree, the only place I saw pieces of Israel were the land swaps. And the land swaps accounted for about two to 5% of Israel. Nobody asked for all of Israel. Wait, what do you mean? They asked for all of Israel in 48? They asked for all of Israel in 67. What do you think those wars were about? You're not going to respond to anything I'm saying because you have no answer. I respond to you. That's correct. Okay, Mister Bonnell, we were talking about the diplomatic negotiations beginning with 2000, 2001. The first task for Israel was in diplomacy, okay? It was through war. You don't know what you're talking about. Is the international law argument ever going to get the Palestinians closer to state? Is the israeli state ever going to be dismantled? Do you think that's like, realistic coming up ever in the next 20 years? Again, I'm posing a question, and the question is, regardless of what's feasible or realistic today, the question I'm posing is, can you have peace in the Middle east with this militant, irrational, genocidal apartheid state and power? I don't think so, no. Okay. And the question I'm asking is, can you have peace with this regime, or does this regime and its institutions need to be dismantled similar to what the examples I gave of Europe and southern Africa? How do you contend with the fact that most of the surrounding arab states seem to agree that you can? Yeah, you're correct. Several of them, most importantly Egypt, Jordan, have made their peace with Israel. I should add that Israel's conduct since then has placed these relations under strain. I had very little. I didn't take the reports of a Saudi israeli rapprochement particularly seriously before October 7. The reason being that it was really a Saudi israeli US deal which committed the US to make certain commitments to Saudi Arabia that would probably never get through Congress. Do you not consider the Egypt israeli peace deal legitimate then, since the United States made a great financial contribution to Egypt. I don't think the question is whether that deal is legitimate or not. I think that deal exists. But the point is whether the core of this conflict is not between Israel and Egypt. The core of this conflict is between Israel and the palestinian people. And the reason that Israel agreed to relinquish the occupied Egyptian Sinai and the reason that egyptian israeli peace treaty was signed in 1979 is because Israel in 1973 recognized that its military superiority was ultimately no match for Egypt's determination to recover its occupied territories and that there would come a point when Egypt would find a way to extract an unbearable price. Maybe not just the Israelis wanted peace. Well, the Israelis. Not just because they were afraid of what Egypt might do. If you're talking about the averages, citizen, I think that's a fair characterization. If you're talking about the israeli leadership, I think they looked at it in more strategic terms. How do you remove the most powerful arab military? Two points. Simple points. What was the terms of that? Egypt Israel peace treaty? International law. Egypt demanded every. Nobody cared about international law. Allow me to finish. Every single inch. Nobody talks about international law. Professor and Sadat talked about the reality. No, professor. Territory. Professor Morris. Professor Morris, I know the record. They demanded, as you know, because you've written about it. They demanded every square inch, as you know. They demanded the oil fields dismantled. That's in airfield. No, not dismantled. They want the door and wanted the settlements dismantled. That was dismantled. The settlements. The oil fields in the airfield. They demanded all three back. You can't have back. The airfields weren't there. That's incorrect. What's. You're incorrect. They build an airfield. The Israelis build an airfield in the occupied Sinai and they wanted it back. It back wasn't there. Okay. They wanted the territory in which they built back. The oil fields, the airfields. The settlements had to be dismantled. Yes. Bagan said, I don't want to be the first prime minister to dismantle settlement. But he did. Why? Because of the law. No. I had nothing to do with anything. It was a negotiation, each of which wanted certain Palestinians. The law had nothing to do with anything. Repeatedly in the negotiations. You're not listening. I know you're missing negotiations. The law has nothing to do with anything. With two foreign relations of us. Volumes on it. Nobody cared about the law. The Palestinians kept saying, we want existence. They weren't there. Allow me to finish. The Palestinians kept saying, we want what Egypt got. We want what Egypt got. Egypt got everything back. Nothing to do with the law. Okay. Nothing to do. And number two, I'm not saying it's the whole picture, but as foreign Minister Moishe Dayan said at the time, he said, if a car has four wheels and you remove one wheel, the car can't move. And for them, removing Egypt from the arab front would then remove any arab military threat to Israel. No, the first part did. And that's what the Palestinians kept saying, we want Egypt got from what's true. But forget international law. And by the way, one last thing, one last on a personal note, the quote about Sharma el Sheikh without peace. Okay. That's the only thing you ever cited from a book of mine. You cried. I cited from your book. Yes. I was absolutely shocked at your betrayal of your people. That was pure treason. It was. I apologize for that. I apologize. I apologize. All right. Well, let me try once again for the region and for just entirety of humanity, what gives you hope? We just heard a lot of pessimistic, cynical takes. What gives you hope? Like war? That's a good reason. That's hope. In other words, the fear of war, the disaster of war should give people an impetus to try and seek peace. When you look at people in Gaza and people in the West bank, people. In Israel, they should want. Fundamentally, no. But fundamentally they hate war. Yes, I think so. What gives you hope? There is no hope. No. It's an extreme. No, I'm, hey, I'm not happy to say that. Of course you are. It's a, it's a very bleak moment right now because that I agree with. I agree with. Israel believes it has to restore what it calls its deterrence capability. I think you've written about it, actually. I just realized Israel has to restore its deterrence capability. And after the catastrophe of October 7, restoring its deterrence capacity means this part. You didn't write about the annihilation of Gaza and then moving on to the Hezbollah. No. No. So the Israelis are dead set on restoring that deterrence capability on the arab side. And I know Mooween and I have disagreed on it and we're allowed to disagree. I think the arab side, the lesson they learned from October 7 is Israelis aren't as strong as we thought they were. And that would be an unfortunate, unfortunately, that's really what they believe. And they think that there is a military option, though. And I think that it's a zero sum game at this point. And it's very, very bleak. And I'm not going to lie about that now. I will admit my predictive capacities are not perfect, are limited, but for the moment, it's a very bleak situation. That I agree. And I don't see right now a way out. However, at the very minimum, permanent ceasefire and inhuman and illegal blockade of Gaza. And why is it illegal? They were shooting rockets at Israel for 20 years. Why is that illegal? To blockade Gaza? He thinks they bottle rocks. Why is it illegal? I'll tell you why. You don't rocket your neighbor, expect consequences. But that works both ways. I know, Professor Barr, both ways. I'll tell you why. Because every human rights, humanitarian and UN organization in the world has said, you know, nobody cares about. Is a form of collective punishment. Nobody cares about illegal. Under international. The word illegal. You think a blockade. You don't understand the way the world works. Yes. And these things. And you think confining. Because that's the blockade. Yes. You don't. Confining, confiding. A million children. Combining. That's the choice. Combining. That's a million children. In what the Economist called a human rubbish sheep. The economist supported Israel in this war. And continued to support Israel, what International Committee of Red Cross called a sinking ship with the UN high commissioner for Human Rights called a toxic slum. You think it is a slum? Of course you think. But it's caused by international law. You think it's legitimate. Forget to call. Hey, I know you want to forget the law. What about one thing that every. It's what every Israeli fears the most. What the law, sippy, literally said. I studied international law. I oppose international law. Of course you don't want to hear about the law, then. It's got nothing to do with anything. Okay, so here's the thing then. Don't complain about October 7. If you don't want. If you want to say. All I said was there is no international humanitarian law. There's no distinction between civilians and combatants. There should be. And so now you're doing what Marine said. You're becoming very selective about the law. If you want to forget about the law. Hamas had every right to do what it did. It had every right to do what it did. According to you, not to me. Cause you want to forget the law. Do you still support the Houthis shooting random shit? Absolutely. Okay. That's a violation of international law. You play the same games. Absolutely. And were there a power during World War two who had the courage of the Houthis? Were there a power that had that kind of courage? Outrageous. To be bombing merchant ships while tens of thousands of people died. Actual starvation. Not the starvation that exists in the Gaza Strip, where people before October don't die of starvation, not the concentration campus. What about starvation in Yemen? Don't they have something? Yes, I know. Don't they have anything? Shouldn't they be feeding the Yemeni? Why fight starvation? Why fight the western powers in Israel when you should be taking care of your problems at home? The Houthis, often the only allies of the dispossessed, are those who experience similar circumstances. Don't you think that they should take care of the yemeni problems? I'm very happy. I'm very happy they're helping out the Palestinians. Anyone who helps anybody, anybody who comes to the aid of those suffering a genocide has no genocide, half of whom are children. Yeah. According to the most current UN reports, as of today, one quarter of the population of Gaza is starving. That means 500,000 children are starving. Are on the verge of famine. They keep saying on the verge of. I have not seen. I have not seen one palestinian die of starvation in these last four months. Not one. There have been cases. They're on the verge. They have been documented. I haven't seen them. Yesterday, Al Jazeera said six, and the day before that, they said two. So those are the two. That number probably dies in Israel, starvation also. I don't think there's famine in Israel. There isn't. There isn't in the Gaza Strip either. It's something which is produced for the western. There are infants dying due to a engineered lack of access to food. And I don't think it's engineered. I think if the Hamas stopped shooting. Perhaps, as you said, engineered. I think amnesty and excuse me, Human Rights Watch called it using starvation as a weapon. That's called engineering. Okay? That's what they did. But you were pushed on this by Colman Hughes to bring up, like, an example of why is the Gaza strip, like, by what metric are they starving? By what metric is it so behind the rest of the world, you know. If we're gonna bring up. I want to hear an answer that. Cause he didn't answer. I'm happy to answer it. Yeah. I just called you from the humanitarian organizations. They said one quarter of the population of Gaza is now verging on famine. Before October 7. Okay. Before October 7. I'm not going before October 7. That's where you use that as justification for Hamas fighting. You say the conditions were unlivable. They had to fight. I said to him. So my question is, what made it unlivable prior to October 7? What are the. What are the metrics that you're using? There were about five, six, or seven reports issued by UNC, dad. Issued by the World bank, issued by the International Monetary Fund. And they all said, that's why. That's why. Why did they say why? Why did they say that's why the. Economist, not a radical periodical, described Gaza as a human rubbish. So tell me by what metrics. If you're, if you're a historian, tell me what they said. Tell me by what. Mister Pinel. He's not going to answer again. I. I don't think I've avoid any of your questions. Except. Except when they breached. When they breached a threshold of complete imbecility. Tell me what metric the Gaza Strip is. You remember what I said a moment ago? I said to Professor Morris, I defer to expertise. I look at what the organization say, I look at what the United Nations High commissioner. You don't know. You don't know. You don't care. Okay, I don't know. You know how complicated. Have you ever investigated how complicated is the metric for hunger, starvation and famine? It is such a complicated metric, they figured out if you asked me to repeat it now, I couldn't do it. And yet we have a human development index where we rank countries that we can still measure. Infant mortality, life expectancy. Yeah, we can measure all of these things. Maureen, I'm holding out for you here. You still didn't answer the hope question. What gives you a source of hope about the region? Well, first of all, I would agree with Benny Morris and Norman Finkelstein that the current situation is bleak. And I think it would be unreasonable to expect it to not get even bleaker in the coming weeks and months. And we now this conflict, really, it originated in the late 19th century. It's been been a more or less active conflict since the 1920s, 1930s, and has produced a tremendous amount of suffering and regional conflict and geopolitical complications and all of that. But what gives me hope is that throughout their entire ordeal, the palestinian people have never surrendered, and I believe they never will surrender to overwhelming force and violence. They have taken everything that Israel has thrown at them. They have taken everything that the west has thrown at them. They have taken everything that those who are supposed to be their natural allies have on occasion thrown at them. But this is a people that never has and I believe never will surrender. And at a certain point, I think Israel and its leaders will have to come to the realization that by hook or by crook, these people are going to achieve their inalienable and legitimate national rights. And that that is going to be a reality. What do you mean by that? You mean all of Palestine? Is that what you mean? No. From the river to the sea? Well, ideally, of course, yes. And what I was an inalienable rights. No, what I was saying earlier and then the discussion got sidetracked, is that I did believe that a two state settlement, a partition of Palestine along the 1967 boundaries, would have been a reasonable solution because I think it also would have opened pathways to further. But now you believe what further nonviolent engagement between Israel and the Palestinians that could create other forms of coexistence in a federal or binational or. What do you think about refugees in regards to that? Do you think there has to be a resettlement of the five or 6 million? Whoever wants to lay claim to be. I think there has to be an explicit acknowledgement of a responsibility and the return and of their rights. I think that in the framework of a two state settlement, I think a formula would need to be found that does not undermine the foundations of a two state settlement. And I don't think it would be that difficult because I suspect that there are probably large numbers of palestinian refugees who, once their rights are acknowledged, will find it exceptionally distasteful, exceptionally distasteful to have to live among the kind of sentiments that we've heard around this table today, to be quite frank. I mean, I heard, I was previously unfamiliar with you and I watched one of your preparation videos. Very disconcerting stuff, I have to say. You were explaining two days ago in the discussion about apartheid and how absurd it was that in your view, Jim Crow was not apartheid. Jim Crow was not apartheid, but arab states not giving citizenship to palestinian refugees is apartheid. That's what I meant with my earlier comments about white supremacy. So my issue, that's great, the white supremacy come out. And if I. Well, hold on, let me respond. My issue is that I feel like we have jumped on this euphemistic treadmill. And I think that's part of the reason why this conflict will never get solved is because on one end you've got a people who are now convinced internationally that they're victims of apartheid, genocide, concentration camp conditions, ethnic cleansing. They're forced to live in an open air prison with all of these things that are stacked against them, all of these terms that are highly specific, that refer to very precise things. And then when people like you said. That they think nothing less from someone who doesn't think Jim Crow is apartheid. I don't know if Jim Crow, Crow who does think the problem is you're morally loading. For you, apartheid is when racists do bad things. No. Right. There's a definition of apartheid. That's great. But there's a very clear definition of. Top down racial domination enacted through top down, like federal legislative policies or whatever means that. I don't know if. I don't know if Jim Crow would've qualified for a partner. That doesn't make it any less. Excuse me, Finkelstein, I'm talking right now. Excuse me. Excuse me, twinkle scene. I'm talking to your friend over here. I don't know if it would have qualified as the crime of apartheid. Just like if Israel were to literally nuke the Gaza Strip and kill 2 million people. I don't know if that would qualify for the crime of. In your eyes, probably not. I don't. Well, yeah, but. Because genocide requires a special intent, I think the issue is instead of. And I think this conversation actually is emblematic of the entire conversation. I don't think anything. Let me finish answering. Well, sure, but you accuse me of supporting racism, so. Yeah. And you are. I. Did. You think I support Jim Crow law? Look, when the fact that you can't. Even answer that honestly, it doesn't matter that 800 civilians were killed by Hamas, you said, well, maybe 400 were killed by Israel. No, I know the number. Maybe you said 400. You co signed the opinion. No, I didn't. No, I didn't. Wait, how many? I think the word was some. That's what I heard. Well, you weren't listening. How many people do you think, approximately. If you had to ball. If you had to ballpark it, how many do you think were killed by Hamas on October 7? I think it's pretty clear. Clear that the majority of civilians that. Were killed, 51% or 90%. Don't ask me to put a number. I just want a bulk. Those are two very different intuitions. First of all, are you. When you say Hamas, do you mean Palestinians, or do you mean Hamas, palestinian force? I don't like to say Palestinians because I don't think all palestinian civilians were involved. No, Hamas, Islamic, God, whatever outcome. That's how this discussion started. You said Hamas, and I began to answer that, and then Benny Morris said, actually, he means Hamas, in addition to jihad and the others. So. So, of the invading palestinian force, how many do you think killed civilians versus the IDF? What do you think? The ballpark? The percentage? Well, the figures we have are that about a third of the casualties on October 7 were military, two thirds were. What's your question? How many? What percentage of civilians were killed by the invading force? I think a clear majority. But I can't give you a specific figure. If you thought it was closer to 51% or 99% were killed by. It's interesting to actually stake out a position if you want to be completely agnostic on it. Complete ignorance. Because we don't know. Professor Morris doesn't know. Moen Robban, you can speak with absolute. Certainty that the IDF is targeting and murdering palestinian children intentionally. You see the double standard. No, I don't. You see, I know you don't know. It was a rhetorical question. Obviously you don't. Why? Because you're uneducated on the matter. I looked at the UN report. I looked at the Goldstone report. No, the UN report on the great March of return in 2018. And they said that the snipers were targeting children, medics, journalists and disabled people. Just as they are now in this context. Exactly. No more journalists have been killed in the last several months in Gaza than in any other conflict. In all of world War two. Hamas is not killing journalists. Do you agree that they operate in civilian uniforms, that their goal is to induce that confusion, that that's the way that they conduct themselves militarily? Let me finish my point. More journalists have been more. You want to hear it? So. No, because it's. It is virtuous. Yeah. Yes. Like when you say children over and over again. Talking about how many Israelis were killed. That's not virtue signaling, because that's human. I care about. I don't care if the responsibility. Norm Moen mentions that more journalists were killed in Gaza than in all of world War two. Doesn't get it. That doesn't end there anymore. Medics were killed. That's silly. And he says it's virtually. But when Israelis get killed, that's serious. I never said it's serious on both sides. I'm not virtual signal. I'm asking a substantive question of who do you assign blame to? Or do you play into Norm Finkelstein's conspiracies that the ambulances should have known immediately who was dead, that the numbers were changed because they were fake? Or that maybe 51% of the people were killed by Hamas and Islamic Jihad, but 49% were killed by IDF helicopters? You asked me a direct question and you got a direct answer. I didn't. I got majority, which could be an. I said a clear one to 99. I said a clear majority. What percent is a clear majority? As opposed to. Oh, wait, they live in anthropology. The clear majority, in my view, is well over 50%. Please don't ask me to be more precise, because I. You could say 80, 90, 95. If I knew that, I would say it. I think it's a reasonable. It's a reasonable. Perhaps it is, but I. You're not the best person to be asking that question. You know, I read when you wrote, described Operation Defensive Shield, and you said a few dozen homes were destroyed. You're talking about what happened in Jenin refugee camp. And you said, no, the Arabs said 500. You guys said 500 Palestinians were killed in. No, but that was the statement of the PLO Palestinian Authority. You said a few dozen and that. There were massacres there. A few dozen, yes, a few dozen homes. Yeah. Well, it turned out a 140 building. Buildings were destroyed. 5000. 5000 people. 5000 people were left homeless. How many killed? 5000. How many? You described it. No, I'm talking about homes destroyed. So you're not the best person to be criticizing what Moines says when he says clear majority, but he can't say more. You know why he can't say more? He doesn't. He doesn't know. Yeah, yeah, I understand that. I hope as a historical. If I was trying to belittle, I would give you a very different answer. I would just say, I don't know. I do know, if you want the. Right phrase, there would be. The overwhelming majority were killed by arab gunmen, and very small number were killed by Israelis by accident or whatever. That's probably. That's probably that. Maybe I can state with confidence a clear majority. Overwhelming majority, you may be correct, but I can't state that with certainty. I think there's a very easy way to find out, is to have an independent. Forget independent. Well, of course you forget independent. UN high commissioner, independent human rights. Just repeat, they're all barbaric countries. Assyrian was the head of the UN Commission for Human Rights, but if it. Wasn'T israeli, it would have been okay. He certainly would have been more honest than Israel. Yeah. From your perspective. But to disagree with Stephen, I thought this was extremely valuable at times. Really like the view of history, the passion. I'm really grateful that you would spend your really valuable time. And just one more question, since we have two historians here. Well, just briefly, from a history perspective, what do you hope your legacy as historians, Benny and Norm, will be of the work that you've put out there? Maybe, Norm, you can go first and try to just say briefly, I think. There'S a value to preserving the record. I'm not optimistic about where things are going to end up. There was a very nice book written by a woman named Helen Hunt Jackson at the end of the 19th century, describing what was done to the Native Americans. She called it a century of dishonor. And she described in vivid, poignant detail what was done to the Native Americans. Did it save them? No. Did it help them? Probably not. Did it preserve their memory? Yes, and I think there's a value to that. You know, there was a famous film by Eisenstein, Sergei Eisenstein. It was either battleship Potemkin or mother. I can't remember which one. The last scene was the tsar's troops mowing down all the russian people. He pans the scene, not all the russian people. Yeah, but he pans the massacre. He pans the massacre, but he could. Have killed a lot more. And the last words of the movie were proletarians, exclamation point, remember? Exclamation point. And I've seen it as my life's work to preserve the memory and to remember. I didn't expect that anyone would read my book on Gaza. It's very dense. It gives me even a bit of a headache to read at least one of the chapters. You wrote a book on Gaza. But I thought that the memory deserves to be preserved. Amen. I. Well, I would just say very briefly, unlike my colleague, I think writing the truth about what happened in history in various periods of history, if I've done a little bit of that, I'm happy. Thank you, Norman. Thank you, Benny. Thank you, Stephen. Thank you, Maureen. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Norman Ficklestein, Benny Morris, Maureen Robani, and Stephen Bonnell. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Lyndon B. Johnson. Peace is a journey of a thousand miles, and it must be taken one step at a time. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.

Utterances:
Speaker A: That's a good point. No, no, that's a good point.
Speaker B: Now, some people accuse me of speaking very slowly, and they're advised on YouTube to turn up the speed twice to three times whenever I'm on. One of the reasons I speak slowly is because I attach value to every word I say.
Speaker C: Norm will say this all over and over and over again. I only deal in facts. I don't deal in hypotheticals. I only deal in facts. I only deal in facts. And that seems to be the case, except for when the facts are completely and totally contrary to the particular point you're trying to push. The idea that Jews would have out of hand, rejected any state that had Arabs on it, or always had a plan of expulsion is just betrayed by the acceptance of the 47 partition.
Speaker B: I don't think you understand politics.
Speaker A: They forced the British to prevent emigration of Jews, Muslim Europe, and reaching safe shores in Palestine.
Speaker D: Again.
Speaker A: They did.
Speaker D: Again.
Speaker A: And they knew that the was Palestine persecuted in Europe?
Speaker D: Was Palestine the, the only spot of land on earth?
Speaker A: Yes. Basically that was the problem. The Jews couldn't immigrate.
Speaker D: What about your great friends in Britain, the architects of the Balfour decade, by the late 1930s? What about the United States?
Speaker A: Weren't happy to take in Jews, and the Americans weren't happy?
Speaker D: And why are Palestinians, who were not Europeans, who had zero role in the rise of Nazism, who had no relation to any of this? Why are they somehow uniquely responsible for what happened in Europe and uniquely coastal?
Speaker A: It was the only safe haven for.
Speaker B: Jews, Professor Morris, because of your logic, and I'm not disputing it, that's why October 7 happened.
Speaker C: Oh, my God.
Speaker B: Because there was no options left for those people.
Speaker A: The Hamas guys who attacked the kibbutzim, apart from the attacks on the military sites, when they attacked the kibbutzim, were out to kill civilians, and they killed family after family, house after house.
Speaker B: Talk fast. I'm trying to think that youre coherent.
Speaker C: I'm just reading from the UN.
Speaker B: Yeah, but you know you like them.
Speaker C: Only when they agree with you, though you've lied about this instance in the past. Those kids weren't just on the beach, as is often stated in articles. Those kids were literally coming out of a previously identified Hamas compound they have operated from. They literally did.
Speaker B: You can't. With all due respect, you're such a fantastic moron, it's terrifying.
Speaker E: The following is a debate on the topic of Israel and Palestine with Norman Finkelstein, Benny Morris, Muin Rabani, and Stephen Banel, also known online as Destiny Norm and Benny are historians. Muin is a Middle east analyst and Steven is a political commentator and streamer. All four have spoken and debated extensively on this topic. The goal for this debate was not for anyone to win or to score points. It wasn't to get views or likes. I never care about those, and I think there are probably much easier ways to get those things if I did care. The goal was to explore together the history, present and future of Israel and Palestine in a free flowing conversation. No time limits, no rules. There was a lot of tension in the room from the very beginning, and it only got more intense as we went along. And I quickly realized that this very conversation, in a very real human way, was a microcosm of the tensions and distance and perspectives on the topic of Israel and Palestine. For some debates, I will step in and moderate strictly to prevent emotion from boiling. For this, I saw the value in not interfering with the passion of the exchanges because that emotion in itself spoke volumes. We did talk about the history and the future, but the anger, the frustration, the biting wit, and at times respect and camaraderie were all there. Like I said, we did it in an perhaps all too human way. I will do more debates and conversations on these difficult topics and I will continue to search for hope in the midst of death and destruction, to search for our common humanity in the midst of division and hate. This thing we have going on, human civilization, the whole of it is beautiful and it's worth figuring out how we can help it flourish together. I love you all. This is Alex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Norman Finkelstein, Benny Morris, Mullion Rabbani, and Stephen Bonnell. First question is about 1948. For Israelis, 1948 is the establishment of the state of Israel and the war of independence. For Palestinians, 1948 is the Nakba, which means catastrophe or the displacement of 700,000 Palestinians from their homes as a consequence of the war. What to you is important to understand about the events of 1948 and the period around there, 47 49, that helps us understand what's going on today and maybe helps us understand the roots of all this that started even before 1948. I was hoping that Norm could speak first and Benny, then Wayne, and then Steve.
Speaker B: Norm after World War two, the British decided that they didn't want to deal with the Palestine question anymore and the ball was thrown into the court of the United nations. Now, as I read the record, the UN was not attempting to arbitrate or adjudicate rights and wrongs. It was confronting a very practical problem. There were two national communities in Palestine and there were irreconcilable differences on fundamental questions. Most importantly, looking at the historic record on the question of immigration and associated with the question of immigration, the question of lend UN Special Committee on Palestine, which came into being before the UN 181 partition resolution, the UN special committee recommended two states in Palestine. There was a minority position, represented by Iran, India, Yugoslavia. They supported one state, but they believed that if forced to, the two communities would figure out some sort of modusivendi and live together. United Nations General assembly supported partition between what it called a jewish state and an arab state. Now, in my reading of the record, and I understand there's new scholarship in the subject which I've not read, but so far as I've read the record, there's no clarity on what the United Nations General assembly meant by a jewish state and an arab state, except for the fact that the jewish state would be demographically, the majority would be jewish and the arab state demographically would be arab. The UNSCOP, the UN Special Committee on Palestine, it was very clear and it was reiterated many times, that in recommending two states, each state, the arab state and the jewish state would have to guarantee full equality of all citizens with regard to political, civil and religious matters. Now, that does raise the question if there is absolute full equality of all citizens, both in the jewish state and the arab state with regard to political rights, civil rights and religious rights, apart from the demographic majority, it's very unclear what it meant to call a state jewish or call a state arab. In my view, the partition resolution was the correct decision. I do not believe that the arab and jewish communities could, at that point, be made to live together. I disagree with the minority position of India, Iran and Yugoslavia, and that, not being a practical option, two states was the only other option. In this regard, I would want to pay tribute to what was probably the most moving speech at the UN General assembly proceedings by the soviet foreign minister Gromyko. I was very tempted to quote it at length, but I recognized that would be taking too much time, so I asked a young friend, Jamie Stern Weiner, to edit it and just get the essence of what Foreign Minister Gromyko had to say. During the last war, Gromyko said, the jewish people underwent exceptional sorrow and suffering. Without any exaggeration, this sorrow and suffering are indescribable. Hundreds of thousands of Jews are wandering about in various countries of Europe in search of means of existence and in search of shelter. The United nations cannot and must not regard this situation with indifference. Past experience, particularly during the second World War, shows that no western european state was able to provide adequate assistance for the jewish people in defending its rights and its very existence from the violence of the Hitlerites and their allies. This is an unpleasant fact, but unfortunately, like all other facts, it must be admitted. Gromyko went on to say, in principle, he supports one state or the Soviet Union supports one state. But he said, if relations between the jewish and arab populations of Palestine proved to be so bad that it would be impossible to reconcile them and to ensure the peaceful coexistence of the Arabs and the Jews, the Soviet Union would support two states. I personally am not convinced that the two states would have been unsustainable in the long term if, and this is a big if, the zionist movement had been faithful to the position it proclaimed during the UNSCop public hearings at the time Ben Gurion testified, I want to express what we mean by a jewish state. We mean by a jewish state simply a state where the majority of the people are Jews, not a state where a jew has in any way any privilege. More than anyone else. A jewish state means a state based on absolute equality of all her citizens and on democracy. Alas, this was not to be. As Professor Morris has written, zionist ideology and practice were necessarily and elementally expansionist. And then he wrote in another book, transferred. The euphemism for expulsion. Transfer was inevitable and inbuilt into Zionism because it sought to transform a land which was arab into a jewish state, and a jewish state could not have arisen without a major displacement of arab population. And because this aim automatically produced resistance among the Arabs, which in turn persuade the Yeshiv's leaders, the Yeshua being the jewish community, the Yeshiv's leaders, that a hostile arab majority or a large minority could not remain in place if a jewish state was to arise or safely endure, or, as Professor Morris retrospectively put it, quote, a removing of a population was needed. Without a population expulsion, a jewish state would not have been established. Unquote. The arab side rejected outright the partition resolution. I won't play games with that. I know a lot of people try to prove it's not true. It clearly, in my view, is true. The arab side rejected outright the partition resolution, while israeli leaders, acting on the compulsions inevitable and inbuilt into Zionism, found the pretext in the course of the first arab israeli war to expel the indigenous population and expand its borders. I therefore conclude that neither side was committed to the letter of the partition resolution, and both sides aborted it.
Speaker E: Thank you, Norm. Norm asked that you make a lengthy statement in the beginning, Benny. I hope it's okay to call everybody by their first name in the name of camaraderie. Norm has quoted several things you said. Perhaps you can comment broadly on the question of 1948 and maybe respond to the things that Norm said.
Speaker A: Yeah. Unskop, the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine, recommended partition. The majority of Unskop recommended partition, which was accepted by the UN General assembly in November 1947. Essentially looking back to the Peel commission in 1937. Ten years earlier, a british commission had looked at the problem of Palestine, the two warring national groups who refused to live together, if you like, or consolidate a unitary state between them. And Peel said there should be two states. That's the principle. The country must be partitioned into two states. This would give a modicum of justice to both sides, if not all their demands, of course. And the United nations followed suit. The United Nations, UNSCoP, and then the UN General assembly, representing the will of the international community, said two states is the just solution in this complex situation. The problem was that immediately with the passage of the resolution, the arab states and the Arabs of Palestine said no. As Norman Finkelstein said, they said no. They rejected the partition idea. The principle of partition. Not just the idea of what percentage, which side should get, but the principle of partition they said no to. The Jews should not have any part of Palestine for their sovereign territory. Maybe Jews could live as a minority in Palestine. That also was problematic in the eye of the palestinian arab leadership. Hosseini had said only Jews who were there before 1917 could actually get citizenship and continued to live there. But the Arabs rejected partition, and the Arabs of Palestine launched, in very disorganized fashion, war against the resolution, against the implementation of the resolution against the jewish community in Palestine, and their defeat in that civil war between the two communities while the British were withdrawing from Palestine, led to the arab invasion, the invasion by the arab states in May 1948, of the country, again, basically with the idea of eradicating or preventing the emergence of a jewish state in line with the United nations decision and the will of the international community. Norman said that the zionist enterprise, and he quoted me, meant from the beginning to transfer or expel the Arabs of Palestine, or some of the Arabs of Palestine. And I think he's sort of quoting out of context, the context in which the statements were made that the jewish state could only emerge if there was a transfer of arab population was preceded in the way I wrote it. And the way it actually happened by arab resistance and hostilities towards the jewish community. Had the Arabs accepted partition, there would have been a large arab minority in the jewish state which emerged in 47. And in fact, jewish economists and state builders took into account that there would be a large arab minority and its needs would be cared for, et cetera. But this was not to be because the Arabs attacked. And had they not attacked, perhaps a jewish state with a large arab minority could have emerged. But this didn't happen. They went to war. The Jews resisted. And in the course of that war, arab populations were driven out. Some were expelled, some left because arab leaders advised them to leave or ordered them to leave. And at the end of the war, Israel said they can't return because they just tried to destroy the jewish state. And that's the basic reality of what happened in 48. The Jews created a state. The Palestinian Arabs never bothered to even try to create a state before 48. And in the course of the 1948 war, and for that reason, they have no state. To this day, the Jews do have a state because they prepared to establish a state, fought for it, and established it, hopefully lastingly.
Speaker E: When you say hostility, in case people are not familiar, there was a full on war where arab states invaded and Israel won that war.
Speaker A: Let me just add, to clarify. The war had two parts to it. The first part was the arab community in Palestine. Its militiamen attacked the Jews from November 1947. In other words, from the day after the UN partition resolution was passed, arab gunmen were busy shooting up Jews, and that snowballed into a full scale civil war between the two communities in Palestine. In May 1948, a second stage began in the war in which the arab states invaded. The new state attacked the new state, and they too were defeated. And thus a state of Israel emerged. In the course of this two stage war, a vast palestinian refugee problem occurred.
Speaker E: And so after that, the transfer, the expulsion, the thing that people call the Nakba, happened. Wein, could you speak to 1948 and the historical significance of it?
Speaker D: Sure. There's a lot to unpack here. I'll try to limit myself to just a few points regarding Zionism and transfer. I think Chaim Weizmann, the head of the World Zionist Organization, had it exactly right when he said that the objective of Zionism is to make Palestine as jewish, as England is English or France is French. In other words, as, as Norman explained, a jewish state requires jewish political, demographic and territorial supremacy. Without those three elements, the state would be jewish in name only. And I think what distinguishes Zionism is its insistence, supremacy, and exclusivity that would be my first point. The second point is, I think what the soviet foreign minister at the time, Andrei Gromyko, said is exactly right, with one reservation. Gromyko was describing a european savagery unleashed against Europe's Jews. At the time, it wasn't Palestinians or Arabs. The savages and the barbarians were european to the core. It had nothing to do with developments in Palestine or the Middle east. Secondly, at the time that Gromyka was speaking, those jewish survivors of the Holocaust and others who were in need of safe haven were still overwhelmingly on the european continent and not on Palestine. Not in Palestine. And I think, given the scale of the savagery, I don't think that any one state or country should have borne the responsibility for addressing this crisis. I think it should have been an international responsibility. The Soviet Union could have contributed, Germany certainly could and should have contributed. The United Kingdom and the United States, which slammed their doors shut to the persecuted Jews of Europe as the Nazis were rising to power. They certainly should have played a role. But instead, what passed for the international community at the time decided to partition Palestine. And here I think we need to judge the partition resolution against the realities that obtained. At the time, two thirds of the population of Palestine was arab. The Yeshuv, the jewish community in Palestine, constituted about one third of the total population and controlled even less of the land within Palestine. As a preeminent palestinian historian, Walid al Khalidi has pointed out, the partition resolution in giving roughly 55% of Palestine to the jewish community, and I think 41. 42% to the arab community, to the Palestinians, did not preserve the position of each community or even favor one community at the expense of the others. Rather, it thoroughly inverted and revolutionized the relationship between the two communities. And as many have written, the Nakba was the inevitable consequence of partition. Given the nature of Zionism, given the territorial disposition, given the weakness of the palestinian community, whose leadership had been largely decimated during a major revolt at the end of the 1930s, given that the arab states were still very much under french and british influence, the Nakba was inevitable, the inevitable product of the partition resolution. And one last point also about the UN's partition resolution is, yes, formally, that is what the international community decided on the 29 November 1947. It's not a resolution that could ever have gotten through the UN General assembly today for a very simple reason. It was a very different general assembly. Most african, most asian states were not yet independent. Were the resolution to be placed before the international community today, and I find it telling that the minority opinion was led by India, Iran, and Yugoslavia. I think they would have represented the clear majority partition, given what we know about Zionism, given that it was entirely predictable, what would happen, given the realities on the ground in Palestine, was deeply unjust. And the idea that either the Palestinians or the arab states could have accepted such a resolution is, I think, an illusion. That was in 1947. We saw what happened in 48 and 49. Palestinian society was essentially destroyed. Over 80%, I believe, of Palestinians resident in the territory that became the state of Israel were either expelled or fled and ultimately were ethnically cleansed. Because ethnic cleansing consists of two components, not just forcing people into refuge or expelling them. It's just as importantly preventing their return. And here, and Benny Morris has written, I think, an article about Joseph Weitz and the transfer committees, there was a very detailed initiative to prevent the return, and it consisted of razing hundreds of palestinian villages to the ground, which was systematically implemented and so on. And so Palestinians became a stateless people. Now, what is the most important reason that no arab state was established in Palestine? Well, since the 1930s, the zionist leadership and the hashmite leadership of Jordan, as has been thoroughly researched and written about by the israeli british historian Avishleim, essentially colluded to prevent the establishment of an independent arab state in Palestine in the late 1940s. There's much more here, but I think those are the key points I would make about 1948.
Speaker E: We may talk about Zionism, Britain, un assemblies, and all the things you mentioned. There's a lot to dig into again, if we can keep it to just one statement moving forward after. Steven, if you want to go a little longer. Also, we should acknowledge the fact that the speaking speeds of people here are different. Steven speaks about ten times faster than me. Steven, do you want to comment on 1948?
Speaker C: Yeah, I think it's interesting where people choose to start the history. I notice a lot of people like to start at either 47 or 48, because it's the first time where they can clearly point to a catastrophe that occurs on the arab side, that they want to ascribe 100% of the blame to the newly emergent israeli state to. But I feel like when you have this type of reading of history, it feels like the goal is to moralize everything first, and then to pick and choose facts that kind of support the statements of your initial moral statement afterwards. Whenever people are talking about 48 or the establishment of the arab state, I never hear about the fact that a civil war started in 47 that was largely instigated because of the arab rejectionism of the 47 partition plan. I never hear about the fact that the majority of the land that was acquired happened by purchases from jewish organizations of Palestinian Arabs of the Ottoman Empire before the mandatory period in 1920 even started. Funnily enough, King Abdullah of Jordan was quoted as saying, the Arabs are as prodigal in selling their land as they are in weeping about it. I never hear about the multiple times that Arabs rejected partition, rejected living with Jews, rejected any sort of state that would have even had any sort of jewish exclusivity. It's funny because it was brought up before that the partition plan was unfair, and that's why the Arabs rejected it as though they rejected it, because it was unfair, because of the amount of land that Jews were given, and not just due to the fact that Jews were given land at all. As though a 30% partition or a 25% partition would have been accepted. When I don't think that was the reality of the circumstances. I feel like most of the other stuff has been said, but I noticed that whenever people talk about 48 or the years preceding 48, I think the worst thing that happens is there's a cherry picking of the facts where basically all of the blame is ascribed to this built in idea of Zionism, that because of a handful of quotes or because of an ideology, we can say that transfer or population expulsion or basically the mandate of all of these Arabs being kicked off the land was always going to happen. When I think there's a refusal sometimes as well, to acknowledge that regardless of the ideas of some of the zionist leaders, there is a political, social and military reality on the ground that they're forced to contend with. And unfortunately, the Arabs, because of their inability to engage in diplomacy and only to use tools of war to try to negotiate. Everything going on in mandatory Palestine basically always gave the Jews a reason or an excuse to fight and acquire land through that way, because of their refusal to negotiate on anything else, whether it was the partition plan in 47, whether it was the. The lusayan peace conference afterwards, where Israel even offered to annex Gaza in 51, where they offered to take in 100,000 refugees. Every single deal is just rejected out of hand because the Arabs don't want a jewish state anywhere in this region of the world.
Speaker B: I would like to engage Professor Morris, if you don't mind. I'm not with the first name. It's just not my way of relating.
Speaker A: You can just call me Morris. You don't need the professor.
Speaker B: Okay. There's a real problem here, and it's been a problem I've had over many years of reading your work, apart perhaps from a grandchild, I suspect nobody knows your work better than I do. I've read it many times. Not once, not twice, at least three times. Everything you've written. And the problem is, it's a kind of quicksilver. Very hard to grasp a point and hold you to it. So we're going to try here to see whether we can hold you to a point. And then you argue with me. The point. I have no problem with that. Your name, please?
Speaker C: Stephen Bonnell.
Speaker B: Mister Bonnell referred to cherry picking and handful of quotes. Now, it's true that when you wrote your first book on the palestinian refugee question, you only had a few lines on this issue of transfer.
Speaker A: Four pages.
Speaker B: Yeah. In the first book.
Speaker A: In the first book.
Speaker B: Four pages, maybe four. You know, I'm not going to quarrel. My memory is not clear. We're talking about 40 years ago. I read it. I read it. But then I read other things about you. Okay. And you were taken to task, if my memory is correct, that you hadn't adequately documented the claims of transfer. Allow me to finish. And I thought that was a reasonable challenge, because it was an unusual claim for a mainstream israeli historian to say, as you did in that first book, that from the very beginning, transfer figured prominently in zionist thinking. That was an unusual. If you read Anita Shapiro, you read Shabtai Tevid. That was an unusual acknowledgement by you. And then I found it very impressive that in that revised version of your first book, you devoted 25 pages to copiously documenting the salience of transfer in zionist thinking. And in fact, you used a very provocative and resonant phrase. You said that transfer was inevitable, an inbuilt into Zionism. We're not talking about circumstantial factors, a war, arab hostility. You said, it's inevitable and inbuilt into Zionism. Now, as I said, so we won't be accused of cherry picking. Those were 25 very densely argued pages. And then in an interview, and I could cite several quotes, but I'll choose one, you said removing a population was needed. Let's look at the words. Without a population expulsion, a jewish state would not have been established. Now you're the one. Again, I was very surprised when I read your book here. I'm referring to righteous victims. I was very surprised when I came to that page 37 where you wrote that territorial displacement, dispossession was the chief motor of arab resistance to Zionism. Territorial displacement and dispossession were the chief motor of arab resistance to Zionism. So you then went on to say, because the arab population rationally feared territorial displacement and dispossession, it, of course, opposed Zionism. That's as normal as Native Americans opposing the euro American manifest destiny in the history of our own country because they understood it would be at their expense. It was inbuilt and inevitable. And so now for you to come along and say that it all happened just because of the war, that otherwise the Zionists made all these plans for a happy minority to live there, that simply does not gel. It does not cohere. It is not reconcilable with what you yourself have written. It was inevitable and inbuilt. Now, in other situations, you've said, that's true, but I think it was a greater good to establish a jewish state at the expense of the indigenous population. That's another kind of argument. That was Theodore Roosevelt's argument in our own country. He said, we don't want the whole of North America to remain a squalid refuge for these wigwams and teepees. We have to get rid of them and make this a great country. But he didn't deny that it was inbuilt and inevitable.
Speaker A: I think you've made your point. First, I'll take up something that Moin said. He said that the Nakba was inevitable.
Speaker D: As have you, and predictable.
Speaker A: No, no, no. I've never said that. It was inevitable and predictable. Only because the Arabs assaulted the jewish community and state in 19, 47, 48. Had there been no assault, there probably wouldn't have been a refugee problem. There's no reason for a refugee problem to have occurred. Expulsions to have occurred. Dispossession, massive dispossession to occur. These occurred as a result of war. Now, Norman has said that I said that transfer was inbuilt into Zionism in one way or another, and this is certainly true. In order to buy land, the Jews bought tracts of land on which some Arabs sometimes lived. Sometimes they bought tracts of land on which there weren't arab villages. But sometimes they bought land on which there were Arabs. And according to ottoman law and the British, at least in the initial years of the british mandate, the law said that the people who bought the land could do what they liked with the people who didn't own the land, who were basically squatting on the land, which is the arab tenant farmers, which is, we're talking about a very small number, actually, of Arabs who were displaced as a result of land purchases in the ottoman period or the mandate period. But there was dispossession in one way. They didn't possess the land. They didn't own it, but they were removed from the land. And this did happen in Zionism. And there's, if you like, inevitability in zionist ideology of buying tracts of land and starting to work it yourself and settle it with your own people and so on. That made sense. But what we're really talking about is what happened in 4748. And in 47 48, the Arabs started a war. And actually, people pay for their mistakes. And the Palestinians have never actually agreed to pay for their mistakes. They make mistakes, they attack, they suffer as a result. And we see something similar going on today in the Gaza Strip. They do something terrible. They kill 1200 Jews, they abduct 250 women and children and babies and old people and whatever, and then they start screaming, please save us from what we did, because the Jews are counterattacking. And this is what happened then, and this is what's happening now. There's something fairly similar in the situation here, expulsion. And this is important, Norman, you should pay attention to this. You didn't raise that expulsion. Transfer whenever policy of the zionist movement before 47, it doesn't exist in zionist platforms. Of the various political parties, of the zionist organization, of the israeli state, of the jewish agency, nobody would have actually made it into policy because there was always a large minority. If there were people who wanted it, always a large minority of jewish politicians and leaders would have said, no, this is immoral. We cannot start a state on the basis of an expulsion. So it was never adopted and actually was never adopted as policy, even in 48, even though Ben Gurion wanted as few Arabs in the course of the war staying in the jewish state after they attacked it, he didn't want disloyal citizens staying there because they wouldn't have been loyal citizens. This made sense in the war itself, but the movement itself and its political parties never accepted it. It's true that in 1937, when the British, as part of the proposal by the Peel commission to divide the country into two states, one Arab, one Jewish, which the Arabs, of course, rejected, a Peel also recommended the Arabs. Most of the Arabs in the jewish state to be. Should be transferred, because otherwise, if they stayed and were disloyal to the emergent jewish state, this would cause endless disturbances, warfare, killing, and so on. So Ben Gurion and Weizmann latched onto this proposal by the most famous democracy in the world, the british democracy, when they proposed the idea of transfer side by side with the idea of partition, because it made sense. And they said well, if the British say so, we should also advocate it. But they never actually tried to pass it as zionist policy, and they fairly quickly stopped even talking about transfer after 1938.
Speaker E: So just to clarify, what you're saying is that 47 was an offensive war, not a defensive war.
Speaker A: By the Arabs?
Speaker E: Yes, by the Arabs, yeah. And you're also saying that there was never a top down policy of expulsion.
Speaker A: Yes.
Speaker E: Just to clarify the point, if I.
Speaker D: Understood you correctly, you're making the claim that transfer, expulsion and so on was in fact a very localized phenomenon resulting from individual land purchases. If I understand you correctly, you're also making the claim that the idea that a jewish state requires a removal or overwhelming reduction of the non jewish population.
Speaker A: Was, if the Arabs are attacking you, yes.
Speaker D: But let's say prior to 1947, it would be your claim that the idea that a significant reduction or wholesale removal of the arab population was not part of zionist thinking. Well, I think there's two problems with that. I think what you're saying about localized disputes is correct, but I also think that there is a whole literature that demonstrates that transfer was envisioned by zaidist leaders on a much broader scale than simply individual land purchases. In other words, it went way beyond, we need to remove these tenants so that we can farm this land. The idea was, we can't have a state where all these Arabs remain and we have to get rid of them. And the second, I think, impediment to that view is that long before the UN General assembly convened to address a question of Palestine, palestinian and arab and other leaders as well, had been warning, ad infinitum, that the purpose of the zionist movement is not just to establish a jewish state, but to establish an exclusivist jewish state. And that transfer, forced to spread a displacement, was fundamental to that project. And just responding to. Sorry, was it Steven Bonnell or Donald Bonnell? Yeah, with a b. Yeah. You made the point that the problem here is that people don't recognize, is that the first and last result for the Arabs is always war. I think theres a problem with that. I think you might do well to recall the 1936 general strike conducted by Palestinians at the beginning of the revolt, which at the time was the longest recorded general strike in history. You may want to consult the book published last year by Laurie, a history of false hope, which discusses in great detail the consistent engagement by Palestinians, their leaders, their elites, their diplomats, and so on with all these international committees. If we look at today, the Palestinians are once again going to the International Court of Justice. Theyre consistently trying to persuade the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to do his job, they have launched widespread boycott campaigns. So, of course, the Palestinians have engaged in military resistance. But I think the suggestion that this has always been their first and last resort and that they have somehow spurned civic action, spurned diplomacy, I think, really has no basis in reality.
Speaker C: I'll respond to that. And then a question for Norm to take into account, I think, when he answers, Benny, because I am curious. Obviously, I have fresher eyes on this, and I'm a newcomer to this arena versus the three of you guys, for sure. A claim that gets brought up a lot has to do with the inevitability of transfer in Zionism, or the idea that as soon as the Jews envisioned a state in Palestine, they knew that it would involve some mass transfer of population, perhaps a mass expulsion. I'm sure we'll talk about plan Dalit or plan D at some point. The issue that I run into is, while you can find quotes from leaders, while you can find maybe desires expressed in diaries, I feel like it's hard to truly ever know if there would have been mass transfer in the face of arab peace, because I feel like every time there was a huge deal on the table that would have had a sizable jewish and arab population living together, the Arabs would reject it out of hand. So, for instance, when we say that transfer was inevitable, when we say that Zionists would have never accepted a sizable arab population, how do you explain the acceptance of the 47 partition plan that would have had a huge arab population living in the jewish state? Is your contention that after the acceptance of that, after the establishment of that state, that Jews would have slowly started to expel all of these arab citizens from their country? Or how do you explain that in Luzon, a couple years later, that Israel was willing to formally annex the Gaza Strip and make 200,000 or so people those citizens? But I'm just curious, how do we get this idea of Zionism always means mass transfer when there were times, at least early on in the history of Israel and a little bit before it, where Israel would have accepted a state that would have had a massive arab population in it? Yeah. Is your idea that they would have just slowly expelled them afterwards, or is.
Speaker D: That question to me or norm here to either one.
Speaker C: I'm just curious for the incorporation of the answer.
Speaker B: Yeah, there is some misunderstandings here, so let's try to clarify that. Number one, it was the old historians who would point to the fact, in Professor Morris's terminology, the old historians, what he called not real historians. He called them chroniclers, not real historians. It was the old israeli historians who denied the centrality of transfer in zionist thinking. It was then Professor Morris who, contrary to Israel's historian establishment, who said, now you remind me, it's four pages. But it came at the end of the book. It was.
Speaker A: No, no, it's at the beginning of the book.
Speaker B: Transfer.
Speaker A: Transfer is dealt with in four pages. At the beginning of my first book on the battles of the refugee problem.
Speaker B: It's a fault of my memory, but the point still stands. It was Professor Morris who introduced this idea in what you might call a big way.
Speaker A: Yeah, but I didn't say central to the science experiment. You're saying centrality.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: I never said it was central. I said it was there. Okay idea.
Speaker E: It's. By the way, it's okay to respond back and forth. This is great. And also, just a quick question, if I may. You're using quotes from. From Benny, from Professor Morris. It's also okay to say those quotes do not reflect the full context of the. So, like, if we go back, you know, to quotes we've said in the past, and you both here have written, the three of you have written on this topic a lot, is we should be careful and just admit, like, well.
Speaker C: Yeah, well, that's just real quick. Just to be clear, the contention is that norm is quoting a part and saying that this was the entire reason for this, whereas Benny's saying, it's a part of the.
Speaker B: I'm not quoting a part. I'm quoting 25 pages, where Professor Morris was at great pains to document the claim that appeared in those early four pages of his book. Now, you say it never became part of the official zionist platform.
Speaker A: It never became public policy.
Speaker B: Fine.
Speaker A: It wasn't policy.
Speaker B: We're also asked, well, this is true. Why did that happen? Why did that happen? It's because it's a very simple fact, which everybody understands. Ideology doesn't operate in a vacuum. There are real world practical problems. You can't just take an ideology and superimpose it on a political reality and turn it into a fact. It was the british mandate. There was significant arab resistance to Zionism, and that resistance was based on the fact, as you said, the fear of territorial displacement and dispossession. So you couldn't very well expect the zionist movement to come out in neon lights and announce, hey, we're going to be expelling you the first chance we get. That's not realistic.
Speaker A: Now, let me respond. Look, you've said it a number of times that the Arabs, from fairly early on in the conflict, from the 1890s, the early 19 hundreds, said, the Jews intend to expel us. This doesn't mean that it's true. It means that some Arabs said this, maybe believing it was true, maybe using it as a political instrument to gain support to mobilize Arabs against the zionist experiment. But the fact is, transfer did not occur before 1947. And Arabs later said then and since then have said that the Jews want to build a third temple on the Temple Mount, as if that's what really the mainstream of Zionism has always wanted and always strived for. But this is nonsense. It's something that Husseini used to use as a way to mobilize masses for the cause, using religion as the way to get them to join him. The fact that Arabs said that the Zionists wanted dispossess us doesn't mean it's true. It just means that there's some Arabs thought that maybe said it sincerely and maybe insincerely. Professor Morris later became a self fulfilling prophecy, this truth.
Speaker B: Professor Morris.
Speaker A: Arabs attacked the Jews.
Speaker B: Professor Morris, I read through your stuff. Even yesterday. I was looking through righteous victims.
Speaker A: You should read other things. You're wasting your time.
Speaker B: No, no, actually, no, I do read other things, but I don't consider it a waste of time to read you. Not at all. You say that this wasn't inherent in Zionism. Now, would you all agree that Ben David, Ben Gurion was a Zionist?
Speaker A: Major Zionist.
Speaker B: Right. Would you agree Ryan Weitzman was a Zionist?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Okay. I believe they were. I believe they took their ideology seriously. It was the first generation, just like with the Bolsheviks, the first generation was committed to an idea. By the 1930s, it was just pure rail politik. The ideology went out the window. The first generation, I have no doubt about their convictions. Okay? They were Zionists. Transfer was inevitable and inbuilt in Zionism. You keep repeating. Because I have, as I said then, Mister Morris, I have a problem reconciling what you're saying. It either was incidental or it was deeply entrenched. Here I read it's deeply entrenched. Two very resonant words. Inevitable and inbuilt.
Speaker A: Deeply entrenched. I never wrote.
Speaker B: Well, I'm not sure it's something you inevitable and inbuilt.
Speaker A: The idea of.
Speaker B: Let me concede. Let me concede something.
Speaker A: The idea of transfer was there. Israel Zangville, a british Zionist, talked about it early on in the century. Even Herzl in some way talked about transferring population.
Speaker B: According to your 25 pages. Everybody talked about that.
Speaker E: Well, that's like, we keep bringing up this line from the 25 pages and the four pages. You know, we're lucky to have Benny in front of us right now. We don't need to go to the quotes. Like, we can legitimately ask how central is expulsion to Zionism in its early version of Zionism, in whatever Zionism is today? And how much power, influence does Zionism and ideology have in Israel influence the philosophy, the ideology of Zionism have on Israel today?
Speaker A: The zionist movement up to 1948, zionist ideology was central to the whole zionist experience, the whole enterprise up to 1948. And I think zionist ideology was also important in the first decades of Israel's existence. Slowly, the hold of Zionism, if you like, Bolshevism, held the Soviet Union gradually faded. And a lot of Israelis today think in terms of individual success and then the capitalism and all sorts of things which had nothing to do with Zionism. But Zionism was very important. But what I'm saying is that the idea of transfer wasn't the core of Zionism. The idea of Zionism was to save the Jews who had been vastly persecuted in eastern Europe and incidentally in the arab world, the muslim world, for centuries and eventually ending up with the Holocaust. The idea of Zionism was to save the jewish people by establishing a state or re establishing a jewish state on the ancient jewish homeland, which is something the Arabs today even deny, that there were Jews in Palestine or the land of Israel. 2000 years ago, Arafat famously said, what temple was there on Temple Mount? Maybe it was a nablus, which of course is nonsense, but they had a strong connection for thousands of years to the land to which they wanted to return and returned there. They found that on the land lived hundreds of thousands of Arabs and the question was how to accommodate the vision of a jewish state in Palestine alongside the existence of these arab masses living on, were indigenous, in fact, to the land by that stage. And the idea of partition, because they couldn't live together, because the Arabs didn't want to live together with the Jews. And I think the Jews also didn't want to live together in one state with Arabs in general. The idea of partition was the thing which the Zionists accepted. Okay, we can only get a small part of Palestine. The Arabs will get in 37 most of Palestine in 1947, ratios were changed, but we can live side by side with each other in a partitioned Palestine. And this was the essence of it. The idea of transfer was there, but it was never adopted as policy. But in 1947, to 48, the Arabs attacked, trying to destroy essentially the zionist enterprise and the emerging jewish state. And the reaction was transfer in some way, not as policy, but this is what happened on the battlefield. And this is also what Ben Gurion at some point began to want as well.
Speaker D: Well, you know, one of the first books on this issue I read when I was still in high school, because my late father had, it was the diaries of Theodor Herzl. And I think, you know, Theodor Herzl, of course, was. Was the founder of the contemporary zionist movement. And I think if you read that, it's very clear for Herzl the model upon which the zionist movement would proceed. His model was Cecil Rhodes. His. I think, you know, Rhodes, from what I recall, correct me if I'm wrong, has quite a prominent place in Herzl's diaries. I think Herzl was also corresponding with him and seeking his support. Cecil Rhodes, of course, Washington was the british colonialist after whom the former white minority regime in Rhodesia was named. And Herzl also says explicitly in his diaries that it is essential to remove the existing population from Palestine. Can I respond to this in a moment, please? He says, we shall have to speak spirit the penniless population across the borders and procure employment for them elsewhere or something. And Israel Zangwill, who you mentioned, a land without a people. For a people without a land. They knew damn well it wasn't a people. A land without a people. I'll continue, but I'll. Please go ahead.
Speaker A: There is one small diary entry in Herzl's vast.
Speaker D: It's five volumes.
Speaker A: Yeah, five volumes. There's one paragraph which actually mentions the idea of transfer. There are people who think that Herzl was actually pointing to South America when he was talking about that the Jews were going to move to Argentina and then they would try and buy out or buy off or spirit the penniless natives to make way for jewish settlement. Maybe he wasn't even talking about the Arabs in that particular passage. That's the argument of some people. Maybe he was. But the point is it has only 100th of a 1% of the diary which is devoted to the subject. It's not a central idea in Herzl's thinking, what Herzl wanted, and this is what's important, not Rhodes. I don't think he was the model. Herzl wanted to create a liberal, democratic, western state in Palestine for the Jews. That was the idea. Not some imperial enterprise serving some imperial master, which is what Rhodes was about. But to have a jewish state which was modeled on the western democracies in Palestine. And this, incidentally, was more or less what Weizmann and Ben Gurion. Ben Gurion wanted. Ben Gurion was more of a socialist. Weizmann was more of a liberal westerner. But they wanted to establish a social democratic or liberal state in Palestine. And they both envisioned, through most of the years of their activity that there would be an arab minority in that jewish state. It's true that Ben Gurion strived to have as small as possible an arab minority in the jewish state because he knew that if you want a jewish majority state, that would be necessary. But it's not something which they were willing to translate into actual policy.
Speaker E: Just a quick pause to mention that for people who are not familiar, Theodor Herzl we're talking about over a century ago, and everything we've been talking about has been mostly 1948 and before.
Speaker D: Yes, just one clarification on Herzl's diaries. I mean, the other thing that I recall from those diaries is he was very preoccupied with, in fact, getting great power, patronage, seeing Palestine, the jewish state in Palestine, I think his words an outpost of civilization against barbarism. In other words, very much seeing his project as a proxy for western imperialism in the Middle east.
Speaker A: Not proxy. He wanted to establish a jewish state which would be independent. To get that, he hoped that he would be able to garner support from.
Speaker D: Major imperial power, including the ottoman sultan, who he tried to cultivate. I just want to respond to point you made earlier, which was that people express their rejection of the partition resolution on the grounds that it gave the majority of Palestine to the jewish community, which formed only a third. Whereas, in fact, if I understood you correctly, you're saying the Palestinians and the Arabs would have rejected any partition resolution.
Speaker C: A couple of things that, one, they would have rejected any. Two, a lot of that land given was in the Negev. It was pretty terrible land at the time. And three, the land that would have been partitioned to Jews, I think would have been. I think I saw it was like 500,000 Arabs. It would have been 500,000 Jews, 400,000 Arabs, and I think like 80,000 Bedouin would have been there. So the state would have been.
Speaker D: I think you raise a valid point, because I think the Palestinians did reject the partition of their homeland in principle. And I think the fact that the United Nations General assembly then awarded the majority of their homeland to the zionist movement only added insult to injury. I mean, one doesnt have to sympathize with the Palestinians to recognize that they have now been a stateless people for 75 years. Can you name any country, yours, for example, or yours, that would be prepared to give 55%, 25%, 10% of your country to the Palestinians? Of course not. And so the issue was not the existence of Jews in Palestine. They had been there for centuries. And of course they had ties to Palestine, and particularly to Jerusalem and other places going back centuries, if not millennia. But the idea of establishing an exclusively jewish state at the expense of those who are already living there, I think it was right to reject that. And I don't think we can look back now, 75 years later and say, well, you should have accepted losing 55% of your homeland, because you ended up losing 78% of it, and the remaining 22% was occupied in 1967. That's not how things work. And I can imagine an american rejecting giving 10% of the United States to the Palestinians. And if that rejection leads to war and you lose half your country, I doubt that 50 years from now, you're going to say, well, maybe I should have accepted that.
Speaker C: Sure. So I like this answer more than what I usually feel like I'm hearing when it comes to the palestinian rejection of the 40 separate petition plan. Because sometimes I feel like a weird switch happens to where the Arabs in the area are actually presented as entirely pragmatic people who are simply doing a calculation and saying, like, well, we're losing 55% of our land. Jews are only maybe one third of the people here, and we've got 45. And, nah, the math doesn't work, basically. But it wasn't a math problem. I think, like you said, it was.
Speaker D: A matter of principle.
Speaker C: It was an ideology problem.
Speaker D: No, it was a matter of principle.
Speaker C: Yeah. Ideologically driven, that they, as a people, have a right to or are entitled to this land, that they've never actually had an independent state on that they've never had even a guarantee of an independent state on that. They've never actually ruled a government.
Speaker D: That last point is actually not correct, because for all its injustice, the mandate system recognized palestine as a class a mandate which provisionally recognized the independence of.
Speaker C: That territory, of what would emerge from that territory, but not of the Palestinians.
Speaker D: It was provisionally recognized, but the territory.
Speaker C: Itself was, but not of the palestinian people. To have a right or a guarantee to a government that would have.
Speaker D: It was a british mandate of Palestine, not the british mandate of Israel.
Speaker A: The word exclusive, which you keep using is nonsense. The state which Ben Gurion envisioned would be a jewish majority state as they accepted the 1947 partition resolution. As Stephen said, that included 400,000 plus Arabs in a state which would have 500,000 Jews. So the idea of exclusivity wasn't anywhere in the air at all among the zionist leaders in 4748. They wanted a jewish majority state, but were willing to accept a state which had 40% Arabs. That's one point. The second thing is the Palestinians may have regarded the land of Palestine as their homeland, but so did the Jews. It was the homeland of the Jews as well. The problem was the Arabs were unable, and remain to this day, unable to recognize that for the Jews, that is their homeland as well. And the problem then is, how do you share this homeland either with one binational state or separate this partitioned into two states? The problem is that the Arabs have always rejected both of these ideas. The homeland belongs to the Jews, as Jews feel as much as it does for the Arabs. I would say for the Jews, it's the jewish people homeland.
Speaker C: Real quick, I just want for both of you guys, because I haven't heard these questions answered. I really want these questions to be. I'm just so curious how to make sense of them. It was correctly brought up that I believe that Ben Gurion had. I think Shlomo Ben amid describes it as an obsession with getting validation or support from western states, Great Britain, and then a couple decades later, it becomes a Suez war. The Suzuki crisis. Yes, exactly correct. That was one of the major motivators, the idea to work with Britain and France on a military operation.
Speaker D: Imperial stooge.
Speaker C: But then the question again, I go back to if that is true, if Ben Gurion, if the early Israel saw themselves as a western fashioned nation, how could we possibly imagine that they would have engaged in the transfer of some 400,000 Arabs after accepting the partition plan? Would that not have completely and totally destroyed their legitimacy in the eyes of the entire western world? Would that not have been? How not?
Speaker D: Well, first of all, I think that the zionist leadership's acceptance of the partition resolution, and I think you may have written about this, that they accepted it because it provided international endorsement of the legitimacy of the principle of jewish statehood, and they didn't accept the borders and in fact, later expanded the borders. Second of all, the borders were expanded in war.
Speaker A: They accepted the UN partition resolution, borders.
Speaker D: And all that's how they accepted.
Speaker A: You can say that some of the Zionists, deep in their hearts, had the idea that maybe at some point, including their, they would be able to get.
Speaker D: More, including their most senior leaders, who said so. And I think you've quoted them grudgingly.
Speaker A: What the United nations, the world community, had said, this is what you're going to get.
Speaker D: And second of all, I mean, removing dark people, darker people, Jews are as dark. It's intrinsic. It's intrinsic. It's intrinsic to western history. So the idea that Americans or Brits or the French would have an issue with. I mean, French had been doing it in Algeria for decades, the Americans have been doing it in North America for centuries. How would Israel forcibly displacing Palestinians somehow besmirch Israel in the eyes of the west?
Speaker B: In the 1944 resolution of the Labour Party, and at the time, even Bertrand Russell was a member of the Labour party, it endorsed transfer of Arabs out of Palestine. As Moines pointed out, that was a deeply entrenched idea in western thinking, that there was nothing, it doesn't in any way contradict or violate or breach any moral values to displace the palestinian population. Now, I do believe there's a legitimate question. Had it been the case, as you said, Professor Morris, that the Zionists wanted to create a happy state with a jewish majority, but a large jewish minority, and if by virtue of immigration, like in our own country. In our own country, given the current trajectories, non whites will become the majority population in the United States quite soon, and according to democratic principles, we have to accept that. So if that were the case, I would say maybe there is an argument that had there been mass jewish immigration changed the demographic balance in Palestine, and therefore Jews became the majority. You can make an argument in the abstract that the indigenous arab population should have been accepting of that, just as whites in the United States, quote unquote, whites have to be accepting of the fact that the demographic majority is shifting to non whites in our own country. But that's not what Zionism was about. I did write my doctoral dissertation on Zionism, and I don't want to get now bogged down in abstract ideas. But as I suspect, you know, most theorists of nationalism say there are two kinds of nationalism. One is a nationalism based on citizenship. You become a citizen, you're integral to the country. That's sometimes called political nationalism. And then there's another kind of nationalism, and that says the state should not belong to its citizens, it should belong to an ethnic group. Each ethnic group should have its own state. It's usually called the german romantic idea of nationalism. Zionism is squarely in the german romantic idea. That was the whole point of Zionism. We don't want to be bundests and be one more ethnic minority in Russia. We don't want to become citizens and just become a jewish people in England, or friends. We want our own state, like the arab 23 states. No, wait, let's. Before we get to the Arabs, let's stick to the Jews for a moment, or the Zionists. We want our own state. And in that concept of wanting your own state, the minority at best lives on sufferance and at worst gets expelled. That's the logic of the german romantic zionist idea of a state. That's why they're Zionists. Now, I personally have shied away from using the word Zionism ever since I finished my doctoral dissertation, because that's painful, because, as I said, I don't believe it's the operative ideology today. It's like talking about Bolshevism and referring to Khrushchev. I doubt Khrushchev could have spelled Bolshevik, but for the period we're talking about, they were Zionists. They were committed to their exclusive state, with a minority living on sufferance or at worst, expelled. That was their ideology. And I really feel there's a problem with your happy vision of these western democrats like Weizmann. And they wanted to live peacefully with the Arabs. Weizmann described the expulsion in 1948 as, quote, the miraculous clearing of the land. That doesn't sound like somebody shedding too many tears at the loss of the indigenous population. Let me just.
Speaker A: The unsufferance I don't agree with. I think that's wrong. The jewish state came into being in 1948. It had a population which was 20% Arab. When it came into being, after arab refugees, many of them had become refugees, but 20% remained in the country. 20% of Israel's population at inception in 1949 was arab.
Speaker D: 80% went missing.
Speaker A: No, no, no. We're talking about what remained in Palestine Israel after it was created. The 20% who lived in Israel received citizenship and all the rights of Israelis, except, of course, the right to serve an army, which they didn't want to. And they have supreme Court justices, they have Knesset members. They enjoyed basically for a period. Sure, they lived under emergency. No, no, wait a second. At the beginning. At the beginning, it's not fantasy. At the beginning, they received citizenship, could vote in elections for their own people, and they were put into parliament. But in the first years, the Israeli, the jewish majority, suspected that maybe the Arabs would be disloyal because they had just tried to destroy the jewish state. Then they dropped the military government and they became fully equal citizens. So if the whole idea was they must have a state without Arabs, this didn't happen in 49, and it didn't happen in the.
Speaker B: Why did you say, Professor Morris?
Speaker A: Yes.
Speaker B: Then why did you say, without a population expulsion, a jewish state would not have been established?
Speaker A: Because you're missing the first section of that paragraph, which was, they were being assaulted by the Arabs. And as a result, a jewish state could not have come into being unless there had also been an expulsion of the population, which was trying to kill people.
Speaker E: Norm, I'm officially forbidding you referencing that again. Hold on a second. Wait. We responded to it. So the main point you're making, we have to take Benietta's word is like, there was a war, and that's the reason why he made that statement.
Speaker D: I think just one last point on this. I remember reading your book when it first came out and reading one incident after the other and one example after the other, and then getting to the conclusion where you said the Nakba was a product of war, not design. I think, and I remember reacting almost in shock to that, that I felt you had mobilized overwhelming evidence that it was a product of design, not war. And I think our discussion today very much reflects, let's say, the dissonance between the evidence and the conclusion. Feel that the research that you have conducted and published demonstrates that it was, in fact, inherent and inbuilt and inevitable. And I think the point that Norm and I are making is that your own historical research, together with that of others, indisputably demonstrates that it does. I think that's a fundamental disagreement we're having here.
Speaker C: Can I actually respond to that? Because this is actually. I think this is emblematic of the entire conversation. I watched a lot of Norm's interviews and conversations in preparation for this. And I hear normals say this all over and over and over again. I only deal in facts. I don't deal in hypotheticals. I only deal in facts. I only deal in facts. And that seems to be the case, except for when the facts are completely and totally contrary to the particular point you're trying to push. The idea that Jews would have out of hand, rejected any state that had Arabs on it, or always had a plan of expulsion is just betrayed by the acceptance of the 47 partition.
Speaker B: I don't think you understand politics. Did I just say that? There is a chasm that separates your ideology from the limits and constraints imposed by politics and reality. Now, Professor Morris, I suspect, would agree that the zionist movement, from fairly early on, was committed to the idea of a jewish state. I am aware of only one major study probably written 40 years ago, the binational idea in Mandatory Palestine by a woman. I forgot her name. Now. You remember her?
Speaker A: I'm trying to, yeah.
Speaker B: Okay. Would you know the book? I think so, yeah. She is the only one who tried to persuasively argue that the zionist movement was actually not formally, actually committed to a binational idea. But most historians of the subject agree the zionist movement was committed to the idea of a jewish state. Having written my doctoral dissertation on the topic, I was confirmed in that idea because Professor Chomsky, who was my closest friend for about 40 years, was very committed to the idea that binationalism was the dominant trend in Zionism. I could not agree with. I couldn't go with him there. But, Professor Morris, you are aware that until the Biltmore resolution in 1942, the zionist movement never declared it was for a jewish state. Why? Because it was politically impossible at the moment. Until 1942. There is your ideology, there are your convictions, there are your operative plans, and there's also, separately, what you say in public. The zionist movement couldn't say in public, we're expelling all the Arabs. They can't say that. And they couldn't even say, we support a jewish state until 1942.
Speaker A: You're conflating two things. The Zionists wanted a jewish state. Correct. That didn't mean that. The expulsion of the Arabs. It's not the same thing. They wanted a jewish state with a jewish majority, but they were willing, as it turned out, both in 37 and in 47, and subsequently, to have an arab minority, a large arab minority. They were willing to have a large arab minority in the country, and they ended up with a large arab minority in the country, 20% of the population. In 49.
Speaker B: They ended up for about five minutes before they were expelled. They agreed to win 47, and then they were gone by March 1949.
Speaker C: What happened in between the rejection of the partition plan and the expulsion of the Arabs?
Speaker A: The Arabs launched the war.
Speaker C: Well, yeah. Well, I mean, like, it's not. It wasn't random. Like, there's a potential that wasn't random.
Speaker B: There was totally agree with that.
Speaker C: Yeah.
Speaker B: It was by design.
Speaker C: You can say that. You can say that. But in this case, the facts betray you. There was no arab acceptance of anything that would have allowed for a jewish state to exist. Of course, number one. And number two, I think that it's entirely possible, given how things happen after war, that this exact same conflict could have played out and an expulsion would have happened without any ideology at play, that there was a people that disagreed on, who had territorial rights to a land there was a massive war afterwards, and then a bunch of their friends invaded after to reinforce the idea that the jewish people in this case couldn't have a state. There could have been a transfer regardless.
Speaker B: Anything could have been. But that's not what history is about.
Speaker C: History is about palestinian rejection. It's up to any peace deal.
Speaker B: As I said over and over and over, when the wall was thrown into the court of the United nations, they were faced with a practical problem. And I, for 01:00 a.m. not going to try to adjudicate the rights and wrongs from the beginning. I do not believe that if territorial displacement and dispossession was inherent in the zionist project, I do not believe it can be a legitimate political enterprise. Now, you might say that's speaking from 2022 or 2020, okay? But we have to recognize that from nearly the beginning, for perfectly obvious reasons, having nothing to do with anti semitism, anti westernism, anti Europeanism, but because no people that I am aware of would voluntarily cede its country. If you can perfectly understand native american resistance to eurocolonialism, you can perfectly well understand it without any anti Europeanism, anti whiteism, anti Christianism. They didn't want to cede their country to invaders. That's completely understandable.
Speaker A: You're minimizing the anti semitic element you minimize in arab nationalism.
Speaker B: In all your books. You minimize.
Speaker A: No, no, no. Husseini was an anti semite. The leader of the palestinian national movement in the thirties and forties was an anti semite. This was one of the things which drove him and also drove him in the end to work in Berlin for Hitler for four years with Nazi. Giving nazi propaganda to the arab world, calling on the Arabs to murder the Jews. That's what he did in World War two. That's the leader of the palestinian arab national movement. And he wasn't alone. He wasn't alone.
Speaker B: Why is it that you read your book righteous victims? You can read it and read it and read it and read it as I have. You will find barely a word about the Arabs being motivated by antisemitism.
Speaker A: It exists, though.
Speaker B: Even I didn't say it doesn't exist.
Speaker A: You agree that it exists?
Speaker B: Hey, I don't know a single non jew who doesn't harbor anti semitic.
Speaker A: We're talking about Arabs now.
Speaker B: Yeah, but I don't know anybody. That's just part of the human condition.
Speaker A: Antisemitism. Husseini was a fourth and among the Arabs.
Speaker B: Professor Morris, here's my problem. I didn't see that in your righteous victims. Even when you talked about the first intifada, and you talked about the second intifada, and you talked about how there was a lot of influence by Hamas, the islamic movement. You even stated that there is a lot of anti semitism in those movements. But then you went on to say, but of course, at bottom, it was about the occupation. It wasn't about. And I've read it.
Speaker A: Yeah, yeah, but you're moving from different. No, I'm not moving across the ages.
Speaker B: It was about your whole book.
Speaker A: The occupation began in 67, the one you were talking about.
Speaker B: I looked and looked and looked for evidence of this anti semitism as being a chief motor of arab resistance to Zionism. I didn't see it.
Speaker C: You like, did he make that claim?
Speaker A: I don't remember the word chief.
Speaker C: It's.
Speaker A: It's one of the elements.
Speaker C: Very binary.
Speaker B: Binary?
Speaker C: Yes, binary.
Speaker B: Please don't give me this postmodernism binary.
Speaker A: You're the one, but you are thinking in terms of.
Speaker B: You're the one that said, do you have your book here? Talk about page 137 37.
Speaker A: You're talking in black and white concepts when history is much grayer. Lots of things happened because of lots of reasons, not one or the other. And you don't seem to see that.
Speaker C: Can I ask you, because it's for them to talk to. A very quick question. What do you think the ideal solution was on the arab side from 47? What would they have preferred and what would have happened if. And then the second one, what would have happened if Jews would have lost the war in 48? What do you think would have happened to the israeli population or jewish population?
Speaker D: I think the Palestinians and the Arabs were explicit that they wanted a unitary, I think, federal state. And they made their submissions to unscop. They made their appeals at the UN General assembly.
Speaker A: What do you mean by unitarian federal? I don't get that. They wanted an arab state. They wanted Palestine to be an arab state.
Speaker D: Yes, yes.
Speaker A: Unitary federal. They wanted Palestine as an arab and exclusively arab state.
Speaker D: No, wasn't an exclusively arab state. I think we have to distinguish between palestinian and arab opposition to a jewish state in Palestine on the one hand, and palestinian and arab attitudes to jewish existence in Palestine. There's a fundamental difference.
Speaker A: The leader of the movement said that all the Jews who had come since 1917, and that's the. The majority of the Jews in Palestine in 1947 shouldn't be there. They shouldn't be citizens, and he shouldn't be there.
Speaker B: He did say that. I'm not going to deny it. It's true. I can understand the sentiment, but I think it's wrong.
Speaker C: But also, you guys.
Speaker D: I want to.
Speaker C: Tell you guys earlier, because you used the words earlier, that it was supremacy and exclusivity that the Zionists.
Speaker D: Well, I want to answer your question, as you, Husseini, did say that, and I'm sure there was a very substantial body of palestinian arab public opinion that endorsed that. But by the same token, I think a unitary arab state, as you call it, or a palestinian state, could have been established with arrangements, with guarantees to ensure the security and rights of both communities. How that would work in detail had, had been discussed and proposed, but never resolved. And again, I think jewish fears about.
Speaker A: What would have been a second Holocaust.
Speaker D: Well, no, that was the jewish fear.
Speaker A: A second holocaust.
Speaker D: That may well have been the jewish fear. It was an unfounded jewish fear.
Speaker C: It was unfounded.
Speaker D: Of course it was unfounded.
Speaker C: What about, like in 48 and 46?
Speaker D: You really think I, that the Palestinians, had they won the war, were going to import ovens and crematoria in Germany?
Speaker C: And there were pogroms across, in almost every single arab state where there were Jews living after 48, after 56, after 67, there were always pogroms. There were always flights from Jews from those countries to Israel afterwards. I dont think it would be.
Speaker D: I wouldnt say there were always pogroms in every arab state. I think there was flight of Arab Jews for multiple reasons, in some cases for precisely the reasons you say. If you look at the jewish community in Algeria, for example, their flight had virtually nothing to do with the arab israeli conflict. The issue of Algerian Jews was that the French gave them citizenship during their colonial rule of Algeria, and they increasingly became identified with french rule. And when Algeria became independent and all the French ended up leaving out of fear or out of disappointment or out of whatever, the Jews were identified as french rather than algerian.
Speaker A: This is a bit of a red herring. There were pogroms in the arab countries. In Bahrain, even, where there's almost no Jews. There was a pogrom in 1947. There was a pogrom in Aleppo in 1947.
Speaker D: I'm not denying any of that history.
Speaker A: Killings of Jews in Iraq and Egypt in 19, 48, 49.
Speaker D: I'm not saying it.
Speaker A: So the Jews basically fled the arab states, not for multiple reasons. They fled because they felt that the governments there and the societies amid which they had lived for hundreds of years no longer wanted them.
Speaker D: Look, without getting into the details, I think we can both agree that ultimately a clear majority of Arab Jews who believed that after having lived in these countries for centuries, for centuries, for centuries in Iraq, for centuries, if not millennia, came to the unfortunate conclusion that their situation had become untenable.
Speaker A: Yes.
Speaker D: I also think that we can both agree that this had never been an issue prior to Zionism and the emergence of the state of Israel.
Speaker A: Looks didn't begin with Zionism in the arab world.
Speaker D: The issue is the point I raised, which is whether these communities had ever come to a collective conclusion that their position had become untenable in this part of the world. No, they were Arab Jews.
Speaker C: Well, because untenable meant there was no alternative. But with the creation of Israel, there was an alternative. Right? A place where they could go and not be discriminated against or live as second class citizens, or be subject to arab majority states. I also think it's interesting that when you analyze the flight of jewish people, and I've seen this, that it wasn't just, I agree with you, it wasn't just a mass expulsion from all the arab states. There were definitely push factors. There were also pull factors. Now, I don't know how you guys feel about the nakba, but when the analysis of the Nakba comes in again, it's back to that. Well, that was actually just a top down expulsion. The retreat of wealthy arab people in the thirties didn't matter. Any of the messaging from the surrounding arab states didn't matter. And expulsion from jewish people or people running from their lives from jewish massacres, again, it's like that. I feel like it's that selective. It's a selective, critical analysis of the.
Speaker D: Term Jewish here, because it wasn't the, you know, the Jews of England or the Soviet.
Speaker C: I say Jewish because prior to 48, the Yeshua.
Speaker D: I think we should, I think it's useful to say, refer to Zionists before 1948 and Israelis after 48. We don't need to implicate.
Speaker C: Well, sure, but the jewish people that were being attacked in arab states weren't Zionists. They were just Jews living there.
Speaker B: Can you just comment on that? I was rereading Shlomo ben Amis last book, and he does at the end discuss at some length the whole issue of the refugee question bearing on the so called peace process and on the question of 48 and the arab emigration, if you allow me. Let me just quote him. Israel is particularly fond of the awkwardly false symmetry she makes between the palestinian refugee crisis and the forced emigration of 600,000 Jews from arab countries following the creation of the state of Israel, as if it were an unplanned exchange of populations. And then, Mister Ben Ami, for those of you who are listening. He was Israel's former foreign minister, and he's an influential historian in his own right. He says, in fact, envoys from the Mossad and a jewish agency worked underground in arab countries and Iran to encourage Jews to go to Israel. More importantly, for many Jews in arab states, the very possibility of emigrating to Israel was the culmination of millennial aspirations. It represented the consummation of a dream to take part in Israel's resurgence as a nation. So this idea that they were all expelled after 1948, that's one area. Professor Moritz, I defer to expertise. That's one of my credos in life. I don't know the israeli literature, but as it's been translated in English, there is very little solid scholarship on what happened in 1948 in the arab countries and which caused the Jews to leave.
Speaker D: Arab Jews.
Speaker B: Arab Jews. Right. But Shlomo ben Ami knows the literature. He knows the scholarship. He's a historian.
Speaker A: Pangiris.
Speaker B: Yes.
Speaker D: From Morocco.
Speaker B: Right.
Speaker D: So he knows from Iraq, is written on this issue.
Speaker A: And they wrote that the Jews in the arab lands were not pro Zionists. They weren't Zionists at all. Certainly Avishlime's family was anti zionist.
Speaker B: And Avishleim, when he was interviewed by Mehran Rappaport on this question, he said, you simply cannot say that the Iraqi Jews were expelled. It's just not true. And he was speaking as an iraqi jew who left with his father family in 1948.
Speaker A: They were pushed out. They weren't expelled. That's probably the right phrase.
Speaker D: I think it's more complex than that. I think it was. Sorry I interrupted.
Speaker B: No, you're not interrupting me, because I don't know. I only know what's been translated into English. And the english literature on the subject is very small and not scholarly. Now, there may be an hebrew literature, I don't know, but I was surprised that even Shlomo ben Ami, a stalwart of his state. Fair enough. On this particular point, he called it false symmetry.
Speaker A: No, no, Stephen is right. There was a pull and a push mechanism in the departure of the Jews from the arab lands post 48. But there was also a lot of push. A lot of push.
Speaker D: That's indisputable. There was.
Speaker E: And on the point of agreement on this one brief light of agreement, let us wrap up with this topic of history and move on to modern day. But before that, I'm wondering if we can just say a couple of last words on this topic. Stephen?
Speaker C: Yeah. I think that when you look at the behaviors of both parties, in the time period around 48, or especially 48 and earlier, there's this assumption that there was this huge built in mechanism of Zionism and that it was going to be inevitable. From the inception of the first zionist thought, I guess that appeared in Herzl's mind, that there would be a mass, violent population transfer of arab Palestinians out of what would become the israeli state. I understand that there are some quotes that we can find that maybe seem to possibly support an idea that looks close to that. But I think when you actually consult the record of what happened, when you look at the populations, the massive populations that Israel was willing to accept within what would become their state borders, their nation borders, I just don't think that the historical record agrees with the idea that Zionists would have just never been okay living alongside arab Palestinians. But when you look at the other side, Arabs would out of hand, reject literally any deal that apportioned any amount of that land for any state relating to jewish people or the israeli people. I think it was said, even on the other end of the table, that Arab Palestinians would have never accepted. The Arabs would have never accepted any jewish state whatsoever. So it's interesting that on the ideology part, where it's claimed that Zionists are people of exclusion and supremacy and expulsion, we can find that in diary entries, but we can find that expressed in very real terms on the arab side. I think in all of their behavior around 48 and earlier, where the goal was the destruction of the israeli state, it would have been the dispossession of many jewish people. It probably would have been the expulsion of a lot of them back to Europe. And I think that very clearly plays out in the difference between the actions of the Arabs versus some diary entries of some jewish leaders.
Speaker A: Benny, one thing which stood out, and I think Moin made this point, is that the Arabs had nothing to do with the Holocaust. But then the world community forced the Arabs to pay the price for the Holocaust. That's the traditional arab argument. This is slightly distorting the reality. The Arabs in the 1930s did their utmost to prevent jewish emigration from Europe and reaching Palestine, which was the only safe haven available, because America, Britain, France, nobody wanted Jews anywhere, and they were being persecuted in central Europe and eventually would be massacred in large numbers. So the arab effort to pressure the British to prevent Jews reaching Palestine's safe shores contributed indirectly to the slaughter of many Jews in Europe, because they couldn't get to anywhere and they couldn't get to Palestine because the Arabs were busy attacking Jews in Palestine and attacking the British to make sure they didn't allow Jews to reach this safe haven. That's important. The second thing is, of course, there's no point in belittling the fact that the arab, palestinian arab national movements leader Hosseini worked for the Nazis in the 1940s. He got a salary from the german foreign ministry. He raised troops among Muslims in Bosnia for the SS. And he broadcast to the arab world calling for the murder of the Jews in the Middle east. This is what he did. And the Arabs since then have been trying to whitewash Hosseinis role. Im not saying he was the instigator of the Holocaust, but he helped the Germans along in doing what they were doing and supported them in doing that. So this cant be removed from the fact that the Arabs, as you say, paid a price for the Holocaust, but they also participated in various ways in helping it happen.
Speaker E: Right.
Speaker D: I'll make two points. The first is you mentioned Hajimeen al Hosseini and his collaboration with the Nazis. Entirely legitimate point to raise. But I think one can also say definitively, had haj, I mean, al Husseini never existed, the Holocaust would have played out precisely as it did. As far as palestinian opposition to jewish immigration to Palestine during the 1930s is concerned, it was of a different character than, for example, british and american rejection of jewish immigration. They just didn't want Jews on their soil.
Speaker A: Objectively, it helped the Germans kill the Jews.
Speaker D: In the palestinian case, their opposition to jewish immigration was to prevent the transformation of their homeland into a jewish state that would dispossess them. And I think that's an important distinction to make. The other point I wanted to make is we've spent the past several hours talking about Zionism transfer and so on. But I think there's a more fundamental aspect to this, which is that Zionism, I think, would have emerged and disappeared as yet one more utopian political project had it not been for the British what the preeminent palestinian historian Walid Khalidi has termed the british shield, because I think without the british sponsorship, we wouldn't be having this discussion today. The British sponsored Zionism for a very simple reason, which is that during World War one, the ottoman armies attempted to march on the Suez Canal. Suez Canal was the jugular vein of the British Empire between Europe and India. And the British came to the conclusion that they needed to secure the Suez Canal from any threat. And as the British have done so often in so many places, how do you deal with this? Well, you bring in a foreign minority, implant them amongst a hostile population, and establish a protectorate over them. I don't think a jewish state in Palestine had been part of british intentions. And the Balfour declaration very specifically speaks about a jewish national home in Palestine. In other words, a british protectorate. Things ended up taking a different course. And I think the most important development was World War two. And I think this had maybe less to do with the Holocaust and more to do with the effective bankruptcy of the United Kingdom during that war and its inability to sustain its global empire. It ended up giving up India, ended up giving up Palestine and its. In that context, I think that we need to see the emergence of a jewish state in Palestine. And again, a jewish state means a state in which the jewish community enjoys not only a demographic majority, but an uncontestable demographic majority, an uncontestable territorial hegemony, and an uncontestable political supremacy. And that is also why, after 1948, the nascent israeli state confiscated, I believe, up to 90% of lands that had been previously owned by Palestinians who became citizens of Israel. It is why the new israeli state imposed a military government on its population of palestinian citizens between 1948 and 1966. It is why the israeli state effectively reduced the Palestinians living within the israeli state as citizens of the israeli state to second class citizens, on the one hand, promoting jewish nationalism and jewish nationalist parties, on the other hand, doing everything within its power to suppress and eliminate palestinian or arab nationalist movements. And that's why today there's a consensus among all major human rights organizations that Israel is an apartheid state. What the israeli human rights organization Bet Selim describes a regime of jewish supremacy between the river and the sea.
Speaker E: You're really tempting a response from the other side. On the last few sentences, we'll talk about the claims of apartheid and so on. It's a fascinating discussion. We need to have it norm on.
Speaker B: The question of the responsibility of the Palestinian Arabs for the Nazi Holocaust. Direct or indirect. I consider that an absurd claim. As Gromyko said, and I quoted him, the entire western world turned its back on the Jews. To somehow focus on the Palestinians strikes me as completely ridiculous. Number two, as Mooween said, there's a perfectly understandable reason why palestinian Arabs wouldn't want Jews. Because in their minds, and not irrationally, these Jews intended to create a jewish state which would quite likely have resulted in their expulsion. I'm a very generous person. I've actually taken in a homeless person for two and a half years. But if I knew in advance that that homeless person was going to try to turn me out of my apartment, I would think 10,000 times before I took him in. Okay. As far as the actual complicity of the Palestinian Arabs, if you look at Raoul Hilberg's three volume classic work, the destruction of the european Jewry, he has in those thousand plus pages one sentence, one sentence on the role of the mufti of Jerusalem. And that, I think is probably an overstatement, but we'll leave it aside. The only two points I would make aside from the Holocaust point is, number one, I do think the transfer discussion is useful because it indicates that there was a rational reason behind the arab resistance to jewish or zionist immigration to Palestine, the fear of territorial displacement and dispossession. And number two, there are two issues. One is the history, and the second is being responsible for your words. Now, some people accuse me of speaking very slowly, and they're advised on YouTube to turn up the speed twice to three times whenever I'm on. One of the reasons I speak slowly is because I attach value to every word I say. And it is discomforting, disorienting where you have a person who produced a voluminous corpus, rich in insight and rich in archival sources, who seems to disown each and every word that you pluck from that corpus by claiming that it's either out of context or it's cherry picking. Words count. And I agree with lex. Everybody has the right to rescind what they've said in the past. But what you cannot claim is that you didn't say what you said.
Speaker A: I'll stick to the history, not the current propaganda. 1917 the British the Zionist movement began way before. The British supported the zionist movement for decades. In 1917, the British jumped in and issued the Balfour Declaration, supporting the emergence of a jewish national home in Palestine, which most people understood to mean eventual jewish statehood in Palestine. Most people understood that in Britain and among the Zionists and among the Arabs. But the British declared the Balfour Declaration, or issued the Balfour Declaration not only because of imperial self interest, and this is what you're basically saying, they had imperial interests, a buffer state which would protect the Suez Canal from the east. The British also were motivated by idealism. And this, incidentally, is how Balfour described the reasoning behind issuing the declaration. And he said, the western world, western Christendom owes the Jews a great debt, both for giving the world and the west, if you like, social values as embodied in the Bible, social justice and all sorts of other things. And the christian world owes the Jews because it persecuted them for 2000 years. This debt we're now beginning to repay with the 1917 declaration favoring Zionism. But it's also worth remembering that the Jews weren't proxies or attached to the british imperial endeavor. They were happy to receive british support in 1917 and then subsequently when the British ruled Palestine for 2030 years. But they weren't part of the british imperial design or mission. They wanted a state for themselves. The Jews happy to have the British support them, happy today to have the Americans support Israel, but its not because were stooges or extensions of american imperial interests. The British, incidentally, always described in arab narratives or propaganda as consistent supporters of Zionism. They werent the first british rulers in Palestine, 1917 1920. Herbert Samuel, no, before Herbert Samuel. Samuel came in 1920. The British ruled there for three years previously and most of the leaders, the british generals and so on, who were in Palestine were anti zionist. And subsequently, in the twenties and thirties, the British occasionally curbed zionist immigration to Palestine and in 1939 switched horses and supported the arab national movement and not Zionism. They turned anti zionist and basically said, you Arabs will rule Palestine within the next ten years. This is what we're giving you by limiting jewish immigration to Palestine. But the Arabs didnt actually understand what they were being given on a silver platter. Husseini again. And he said, no, no, we cant accept the british white paper of May 1939, which had given the Arabs everything they wanted, basically self determination in an arab majority state. So what Im saying is the British at some point did support the zionist enterprise, but at other points were less consistent in the support. And in 1939, until 1948, when they didn't vote even for partition for jewish statehood in Palestine in the UN resolution, they didn't support Zionism during the last decade of the mandate. It's worth remembering that.
Speaker D: I'd like to respond to that. I mean, speaking of propaganda, I find it simply impossible to accept that Balfour, who as british prime minister in 1905 was the chief sponsor of the Aliens act, which was specifically, he changed his mind, which was specifically designed to keep persecuted eastern european Jews out of the streets of the UK, and who was denounced as an anti semite by the entire british jewish establishment a decade later, all of a sudden changed his mind. People change their minds. But when the changing of the mind just coincidentally happens to coincide with the british imperial interest, I think perhaps the transformation is a little more superficial than he's being given credit for. It was clearly a british imperial venture. And if there had been no threat to the Suez Canal during World War one, regardless of what Balfour would have thought about the Jews and their contribution to history and their persecution and so on, there would have been no Balfour there.
Speaker C: Can I ask real quick a question on that? Why did the British ever cap immigration then from Jews to that area at all?
Speaker D: Well, we're talking now about 20.
Speaker A: Sure.
Speaker C: But I'm saying that if the whole goal was just to be an imperialist project, there were terrorist attacks from jewish.
Speaker D: Yes, but I'll answer.
Speaker C: Yeah, in the forties. Yeah.
Speaker D: And we're talking now about 1917. And as I mentioned earlier, I don't think the British had a jewish state in mind. That's why they used the term jewish national home. I think what they wanted was a british protectorate loyal to and dependent upon the British. I think an outstanding review of british policy towards these issues during the mandate has been done by Martin Bunton of the University of Victoria. And he basically makes the argument that once the British realized the mess they were in, certainly by the late twenties, early thirties, they recognized the mess they were in, the irreconcilable differences, and basically pursued a policy of just muddling on and muddling on in the context of british rule in Palestine, whose overall purpose was to serve for the development of zionist institutions, yeshuvas economy and so on meant even if the British were not self consciously doing this, preparing the groundwork for the eventual establishment of a jewish state. I don't know if that answers your.
Speaker A: Question, except they did turn anti zionist in 1939. Yes, of course, they were being shot off by zionist. No, no, before they were being shot off, but maintained that anti zionist posture until 1948.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker D: And if I may just also one point. You mentioned Hajimeen al Hosseini during world. Entirely legitimate. But what I would also point, point out is that you had a zionist organization, the Leahy.
Speaker A: 300 people.
Speaker D: 300 people. One of whom happened to become an israeli prime minister, an israeli foreign minister, a speaker of israeli parliament.
Speaker B: Maybe you should give his name.
Speaker D: Yitzhak Shamir, proposing an alliance with Nazi Germany in 1941. Well, no, the Leahy proposed some people.
Speaker A: In the Lehi propose, of which Amir was a prominent leader. He's a red herring also.
Speaker D: No, no. Okay, well, if he's a red herring, I'm sorry.
Speaker A: The leche was an unimportant organization. In the Yishuv, 300 people versus 30,000 belonged to the Haganah. So it was not a very important organization. It's true. Before the Holocaust actually began, they wanted allies against the British where they could.
Speaker D: 19, 30 41.
Speaker A: From what I recall, 1940, they were. They approached the german emissary in Istanbul or something.
Speaker D: Yes. And if I may, proposed an alliance with Nazi Germany. On what the Leahy described as on the basis of shared ideological. Shared ideological principles. Well, they said they did.
Speaker B: Why are you doing these things?
Speaker A: The lexicons reviled.
Speaker B: But you know, you know what the statement said on the basis of a shared ideology. Why do you say no?
Speaker A: You think you can wait? The Leche people were Nazis. Is that your sin?
Speaker B: No.
Speaker A: Are you saying that. Forget statements. You like to quote things, but were they? Were they Nazis? Were the lehi Nazis? That's what I'm asking.
Speaker B: What did he say?
Speaker A: Some of them supported Stalin.
Speaker B: He's saying that the basis of the pact was their agreement on ideology.
Speaker A: There wasn't any pact. They suggested, I suppose they proposed an agreement.
Speaker B: And what did the agreement say?
Speaker A: They wanted arms against the British. That's what they wanted.
Speaker D: Well, that's what Hajime al Husseini wanted also. That's what.
Speaker A: No, no, but others didn't work in Berlin helping the nazi regime.
Speaker D: That's what the IRA wanted also.
Speaker A: No, but this is what Khatjamin Ali Husseini did. You know that he was an anti semite? You've probably read some of his works. It wasn't just anti british. He was also anti semitic. They had a common ground with Hitler.
Speaker D: I think we can agree every anti.
Speaker B: Semite is a Hitlerite.
Speaker D: I think we.
Speaker C: He literally worked with the Nazis to recruit people. He wasn't just the guy posting.
Speaker B: And he was an absolutely revolting, disgusting human being. There's something happen here.
Speaker C: But the problem is you're saying that Usaini was his influence. You're saying the movement.
Speaker B: But I don't even understand. Of all the crimes you want to ascribe to the palestinian people, trying to blame them directly. Indirectly. Indirectly or indirectly, three times. The move for the Nazi Holocaust is completely lunatic.
Speaker C: Speaker one, hold on the way. There's not a. He's not blaming them for the Holocaust. He's saying that from the perspective. No, he's saying that from the perspective of Jews in the region, Palestinians would have been part of the reason. That is exactly. You have not read what he said.
Speaker B: I've read him.
Speaker C: You never understand him.
Speaker B: Believe, believe me, I'm a lot more literate than you, Mister Barack.
Speaker C: I wouldn't believe the guy that wrote the book.
Speaker B: You read Wikipedia? That's great Hebrew.
Speaker C: And you call yourself an israeli historian. We're all here on different grounds.
Speaker B: I just want.
Speaker D: If I can just respond.
Speaker C: Well, no, I'm just saying that there were two. There were two tricks. That's fine. There were two tricks that are being played here that I think is interesting one is you guys claim that the Leahy was trying to forge an alliance with Nazi Germany because of a shared ideology.
Speaker D: That's what they said.
Speaker C: Yeah, but hold on. No, no, no. Wait. No, no. It's about what you said. You brought that up to imply that Zionism must be inexorably linked.
Speaker D: I'm sorry. No, you're putting words in my mouth.
Speaker C: Okay, wait. Well, then what was the purpose of saying that? The Lehi claimed that they, the Lehi, who were a small group of people that were reviled by many in Israel.
Speaker A: Not many. By everybody, practically.
Speaker D: They were called terrorists.
Speaker A: The zionist movement called them terrorists?
Speaker D: Yes, and hunted them. Called himself a terrorist. They were so irrelevant that their leader ended up being kicked upstairs to the leader of the israeli parliament.
Speaker A: That's israeli parliament.
Speaker D: To the israeli years hence, to israeli foreign minister.
Speaker C: And begin was also. Yes.
Speaker D: You want to characterize him as irrelevant as well? Go ahead.
Speaker C: No, characterizing him as irrelevant based on what happens decades later. The timeline matters. Well, the question is, what is the point of saying that the leahy tried to forge an alone?
Speaker B: It's bringing God, the mufti of Jerusalem, and trying to blame the Holocaust.
Speaker A: The mufti was the leader of the Palestine Arab national movement, the wah. He was 300.
Speaker B: And he had as much to do with the Nazi Holocaust as I did.
Speaker A: No, he recruited people for their assists. How can you get away from that?
Speaker B: No, he recruited people for their assists. He recruited soldiers in the Balkans, mostly Kosovars, which was disgusting. I have no doubt about that. But he had one foreign minister saying.
Speaker A: Don'T let the Jews out. Receive letters from Husseini during the Holocaust. During the Holocaust. Don't let the Jews out. Don't let the Jews out. I'm not saying he was a major.
Speaker B: Architect of the holy minor, but if we're agreed.
Speaker D: If we're agreed that Haj Amin al Husseini, the mufti of Jerusalem, collaborated with the Nazis during World War two and actively sought their sponsorship. Why is it irrelevant and probably wanted.
Speaker A: The destruction of european jewry.
Speaker D: He probably wanted a lot of things.
Speaker A: Okay.
Speaker D: Okay. If that's relevant, why is it irrelevant that a prime minister of Israel.
Speaker A: Not prime minister. In 1941, he wasn't prime minister of Israel. He was a leader of a very small terrorist groups.
Speaker D: So do you consider, do you consider it irrelevant that many years ago Mahmoud Abbas wrote a doctoral thesis which is basically time to mount about Mahmoud Abbas? Okay, but, but I don't.
Speaker A: But didn't bring it up. You're the one who's bringing it up. Belittling the Holocaust. That's what you're saying. The president of the Palestinian National Authority belittled the Holocaust and it didn't happen, or only a few jews died.
Speaker D: I think that's a fair characterization of.
Speaker A: But I didn't bring it up.
Speaker D: I brought it up.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker D: Okay. Because my question is then why is Shamir's antecedency relevant?
Speaker A: He was a terrorist leader of a very small, marginal group. Who would be kidding? Khash Amin al Husseini was the head of the movement at the time.
Speaker C: Also, the point of bringing up Hussaini stuff, embarrassing. The point of bringing up Husseini stuff wasn't to say that he was a great further of the Holocaust. It's that he might have been a great further in the prevention of Jews fleeing to go to Palestine to escape the Holocaust.
Speaker D: That was the point.
Speaker C: That was the point.
Speaker D: And I explained why. I think, um, that's, that's not an entirely, um, accurate characterization. But then I wanted to make another point. If it's legitimate to bring up his role during World War two, why is it illegitimate to bring up a man who would become Israel's speaker of parliament, foreign ministers? Why is it. And, and also, he was a young terrorist and was also responsible for the murder of the United nations first international envoy, Bernadotte Foki Bernadotte. Why is all that irrelevant?
Speaker C: I don't think anybody, I think that the reason why he was brought up was because jewish people in this time period would have viewed it as there was a prevention of Jews leaving Europe because of the Palestinians pressuring the British to put a curb that 75,000 immigration limit. Yes, but it's not about, like, it's not about them furthering the Holocaust or being an architect. Major, minor play in the Holocaust. Well, he was a major player in that region. So if you wanted to bring up.
Speaker D: Like Morris was specific, made the specific claim that the Palestinians played an indirect role in the Holocaust.
Speaker C: The indirect role would have been the prevention of people escaping from.
Speaker D: Yes. And my response to that is, first of all, I disagree with that characterization. But second of all, how can you disagree with that?
Speaker A: They prevented, they forced the British to prevent emigration of Jews, Muslim Europe, and reaching safe shores in Palestine.
Speaker D: Again.
Speaker A: They did.
Speaker D: Again.
Speaker A: And they knew that the. Was Palestine persecuted in Europe?
Speaker D: Was Palestine the only spot of land on earth?
Speaker A: Yes, basically that was the problem. The Jews couldn't immigrate.
Speaker D: What about your great friends in Britain, the architects of the Balfour decade, by the late 1930s?
Speaker A: What about the United States taking Jews and the Americans and why, and why.
Speaker D: Are Palestinians who were not Europeans, who had zero role in the rise of Nazism, who had no relation to any of this, why are they somehow uniquely responsible for what happened in Europe?
Speaker A: And uniquely, it was the only safe haven for Jews. That's right. Oh, really?
Speaker B: The United States wasn't a potential safe haven. The only one was Palestine. The United States had no room, no Jews.
Speaker A: It did have room, but it wasn't. But it didn't.
Speaker B: Safe haven.
Speaker D: This is something you be focusing your.
Speaker A: America should be blamed for not letting Jews in during the thirties, but nobody.
Speaker B: Blames them for the Holocaust.
Speaker A: Well, indirectly, speaker one, I've never heard.
Speaker B: It said that Franklin Delano Roosevelt was indirectly responsible for the Holocaust. I never heard that. Now maybe it's in israeli literature because the Israelis have gone mad. Yes. Your prime minister said the whole idea of the gas chambers came from the mufti of Jerusalem.
Speaker A: That's nonsense. Yeah, we all know.
Speaker B: But we also know that Netanyahu said it.
Speaker A: Netanyahu. Netanyahu says so many things which are.
Speaker D: And he happens to be the prologis. I can't be responsible for them. You're not responsible for them. But it is relevant that he is the longest serving prime minister of Israel.
Speaker A: Unfortunately, he says something about the israeli.
Speaker D: Public and he gets elected not despite saying such things, but because he says such things.
Speaker A: His voters don't care about Khadjamin al Husseini or Hitler. They know nothing about his vote.
Speaker D: They will be right.
Speaker A: His base know nothing about, know nothing about anything. And he can say what he likes and they'll say yes or they don't care if he says these things, you.
Speaker D: May well be right. But anyway, not to be the dead horse, but I don't, I still don't understand. I'll just conclude by saying I don't understand why the mufti of Jerusalem is relevant to.
Speaker A: He is relevant. He is relevant.
Speaker D: But the head of the palestinian Shamir.
Speaker A: Wasn'T the head of the national movement. He represented 100 or 200 or 300 gunmen who were considered terrorists by the zionist movement at the time. The fact that 30 years later he becomes prime minister, that's the crux of history. Hajime, he was the head of the Palestine Arab national movement at the time.
Speaker D: Anyway, what can you do? I think we're speaking past each other.
Speaker A: We're not. I'm talking facts.
Speaker E: Let's move to the modern day and we'll return to history. Maybe 67 and other important moments. But let's look to today in the recent months, October 7. Let me ask sort of a pointed question. Was October 7 attacks by Hamas on Israel genocidal? Was it an act of ethnic cleansing? Just so we lay out the moral calculus that we are engaged in.
Speaker A: Maybe the problem with October 7 is this. The Hamas fighters who invaded southern Israel were sent, ordered to murder, rape, and do all the nasty things that they did. And they killed some 1200 Israelis that day and abducted them, as we know, something like 250, mostly civilians. Also, some soldiers took them back to Gaza, dungeons in Gaza. But they were motivated not just by the words of their current leader in the Gaza Strip, but by their ideology, which is embedded in their charter from 1988, if I remember correctly, and that charter is genocidal. It says that the Jews must be eradicated basically from the land of Israel, from Palestine. The Jews are described there as sons of apes and pigs. The Jews are a base people, killers of prophets, and they should not exist in Palestine. It doesn't say that they necessarily should be murdered all around the world, the Hamas charter, but certainly the Jews should be eliminated from Palestine. And this is the driving ideology behind the massacre of the Jews on October 7, which brought down on the Gaza Strip. And I think with the intention by the Hamas of the israeli counteroffensive, because they knew that that counteroffensive would result in many palestinian dead, because the Hamas fighters and their weaponry and so on were embedded in the population in Gaza. And they hoped to benefit from this in the eyes of world public opinion, as Israel chased these Hamas people and their ammunition dumps and so on, and killed lots of palestinian civilians in the process. All of this was understood by Sinwar, by the head of the Hamas, and he strived for that. But initially, he wanted to kill as many Jews as he could in the border areas around the Gaza Strip.
Speaker D: I'll respond directly to the points you made, and then I'll leave it to norm to bring in the historical context that Hamas charter is from the nineties, I think, 1980, 819, 88, so it's from the eighties. I think your characterization of that charter as antisemitic is indisputable. I think your characterization of that charter is genocidal, is off the mark.
Speaker A: It's implicit.
Speaker D: And more importantly, that charter has been superseded by a new charter. In fact, has been. Well, there is, there is a.
Speaker A: There is no new charter.
Speaker D: There is a charter.
Speaker A: There is an explanation, a statement, 2018 2018, supposedly clarifying things which are in the charter, but it doesn't actually step back from what the charter says. Eliminate Israel. Eliminate the Jews from the land of.
Speaker D: Israel in 2018, the Hamas charter. If we look at the current version of the charter, it's not a call.
Speaker A: To charter, whether you're calling it a charter. It wasn't. The only thing called the charter is what was issued in 1988 by Yassin himself.
Speaker D: Anyway, it makes a clear distinction between Jews and Zionists in 2018. Now, you can choose to dismiss it, believe it, it's sincere, it's insincere, whatever.
Speaker A: Insincere is probably the right word.
Speaker D: Secondly, I'm really unfamiliar with fighters who consult these kinds of documents before they go on in the education system.
Speaker A: In the kindergarten, they're told, kill the Jews. They practice with make believe guns and uniforms when they're five years old in the kindergartens of the Hamas, at the.
Speaker D: Instruction of the commissioner general of Unruh.
Speaker A: I didn't say that. I said the Hamas has kindergartens and summer camps in which they train to kill Jews children.
Speaker D: Secondly. Secondly, you keep saying Jews, to which I would respond, they use the word Jews, to which I would respond that Hamas does not have a record of deliberately targeting Jews who are not Israelis. And in fact, it also doesn't have a record of deliberately targeting either Jews or Israelis outside Israel and Palestine. So, you know, all this talk of.
Speaker A: Unlike the Hezbollah, which has taught well, we're talking about Jews outside. We're talking about Palestine.
Speaker D: We're talking about October 7 and Hamas. If you'd also like to speak about Hezbollah, let's get to that separately, if you don't mind. So again, genocidal? Well, if that term is going to be discussed, my first response would be, let's talk about potentially genocidal actions against Israelis rather than against Jews for the reasons that I just mentioned. And again, I find this constant conflation of Jews, Israel Zionism to be a bit disturbing. Secondly, I think there are quite a few indications in the factual record that raise serious questions about the accusations of the genocidal intent and genocidal practice of what happened on October 7. And my final point would be, I don't think I should take your word for it. I don't think you should take my word for it. I think what we need here is a proper, independent, international investigation, and the reason we need that of genocide during this conflict, whether bye Palestinians on October 7 or Israel thereafter. And the reason that we need such an investigation is because Hamas is, there won't be any hearings on what Hamas did on October 7 at the International Court of Justice, because the International Convention on the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide deals only with states and not with movements. I think the International Criminal Court, and specifically its current prosecutor, Garim Khan, lacks any and all credibility. Hes been an absolute failure at his job. Hes just been sitting on his backside for years on this file. And I think I would point out that Hamas has called for independent investigations of all these allegations. Israel has categorically rejected any international investigation, of course, supported by the United States. And I think what is required is to have credible investigations of these things, because I don't think you're going to convince me. I don't think I'm going to convince you. And this is two people sitting across the table from each other.
Speaker A: No, there's certain things you don't even have to investigate. You know how many citizens, civilians died in the October 7 assault?
Speaker D: Yes, but that's not.
Speaker A: You know that there are lots of allegations of rape. I don't know how persuaded you are of those. They did find bodies without heads, which is.
Speaker D: There were no beheads.
Speaker A: There were some beheadings, apparently.
Speaker B: The Israelis didn't even claim that in the document they submitted before the ICJ. Go read what your government submitted. It never mentioned beheadings.
Speaker A: Well, as far as I know, people who were beheaded.
Speaker B: But we could bring it up right now.
Speaker A: You also deny that there were rapes there?
Speaker B: I didn't deny. I said I've not seen convincing evidence that confirms it. I've said that from day one, and I'll say today, four and a half months later.
Speaker A: Do you know that they killed eight or 900 civilians in their.
Speaker B: Absolutely. That seems to me indisputable.
Speaker A: Oh, okay. Well, I'm glad that you're interested.
Speaker B: I've said that from day one.
Speaker C: Well, to be clear, you haven't. You did a debate. I don't remember the talk show, but you seem to imply that there was a lot of crossfire, and then it might have been the IDF that I.
Speaker B: Killed a lot of. I said that there is no question, because the names were published in Haritz. There's no question that roughly, of the 1200 people killed, 800 of them were civilians. I see 850. Fine. So I never said that. But then I said, no, we don't know exactly how they were killed, but 800 civilians killed, 850, no question there. And I also said, on repeated occasions, there cannot be any doubt, in my opinion as of now, with the available evidence that Hamas was responsible for significant atrocities. And they made sure to include the plural.
Speaker C: There's a lot of tricky language being employed here. Do you think of the Anode 50?
Speaker B: It's called attaching value to words and not talking like a motor mouth. I am very careful about qualifying because that's what language is about.
Speaker C: That's great. Then let me just ask a clarifying question. Do you firmly believe that the majority of the 850 civilians were killed by Hamas?
Speaker B: My view is, even if it were, half 400 is a huge number by any reckoning.
Speaker C: Okay, wait. You didn't even wait because Benny.
Speaker B: Because Professor Morris, I don't know. I agree with Moen Robani. I'm not sure if he concedes the 400. I'll say because I have thought up the 400. Right.
Speaker A: As I said, maybe a couple of individuals were killed in this region.
Speaker B: I don't know.
Speaker C: You're saying, professor, you believe this particular thing and you clearly don't. You clearly don't believe this, right?
Speaker B: You know, you said people died.
Speaker C: That's not controversial.
Speaker D: Wait, hold on, hold on.
Speaker B: That's not controversial. Mister Pinelike, I attach value to words.
Speaker C: You said that.
Speaker B: Mister Brunell, please slow down the speech and attempt to listen. When I was explicitly asked by Piers Morgan, I said there can be no question that Hamas committed atrocities. I've heard this on October 7, if you want me to pin down a number, I can't do that and ask.
Speaker C: You to find out a number. You can listen to what I'm asking. No, my question is. I'll ask. I'll ask a very precise question.
Speaker D: Sorry.
Speaker C: It's a very easy.
Speaker D: If I understood your question correctly.
Speaker C: My question is, do you think the majority of the people that were killed on October 7, civilians, were killed by Hamas? Or are we subscribing to the idea that the IDF killed hundreds? Four or 500?
Speaker D: No, but let me explain why that's a difficult question to answer. The total number of civilians killed was 800. 850. We know that Hamas is responsible, probably for the majority of those killings. We also know that there were killings by islamic jihad. We also know we're bunching together the.
Speaker A: Islamic jihad and the Hamas. That's splitting hairs. No, but he means the raiders.
Speaker C: I'm speaking in opposition to the conspiracy theory that people like. Do you prefer Norm or Professor Frankelstein or. I don't know. How do you prefer.
Speaker D: Well, it's not a conspiracy theory.
Speaker C: Well, the conspiracy theory is the idea that the IDF killed the majority of them.
Speaker D: It's not a conspiracy theory.
Speaker C: Oh, and there's also a theory that, as Norm pointed out on the show that he was on, that he thought that it was very strange that given how reputable israeli services are when it comes to sending ambulances retrieving bodies. He thought it was very strange that that number was continually being adjusted.
Speaker D: And do you know why you say.
Speaker C: That in combination with. Well, I'm nothing. Not sure how many were killed.
Speaker D: Well, do you know why the number went down? The number went down because the israeli authorities were in possession of 200 corpses that were burned to a crisp that they assumed were Israelis who had been killed on October 7. They later determined that these were, in fact, palestinian fighters. Now, how does a palestinian fighter get burnt to a crisp?
Speaker A: No, you're mixing two things. Some of the bodies they weren't able to identify, and eventually they ruled that some of them were actually arab marauders rather than israeli victims. A few of them, also of the Jews, were burnt to a crisp. And it took them time to work this out. And they came out initially with a slightly higher figure, 1400 dead, and eventually reduced it to 1200 Israelis.
Speaker D: And the reason is that a proportion of israeli civilians killed on October 7, I don't believe it was a majority. We don't know how many. Some were killed in crossfire, some were killed by israeli shellfire, helicopter fire, and so on. And the majority were killed by Palestinians. And of that majority, we don't know. I mean, again, I understood your question as referring specifically to Hamas, which is why I tried to answer it that way. But if you meant generically Palestinians, yes, if you mean specifically Hamas, we don't have a clear breakdown of how.
Speaker C: I don't mean specifically Hamas, but I just think when you use the word some, that's doing a lot of heavy lifting. We use some, that's fine, but some can mean anywhere from 1% to 49%.
Speaker D: But we don't know.
Speaker E: So the numbers here and the details are interesting and important almost from a legal perspective. But if we zoom out the moral perspective, are Palestinians from Gaza justified in violent resistance?
Speaker D: Well, Palestinians have the right to resistance. Palestinian. That right includes the right to armed resistance. At the same time, armed resistance is subject to the laws of war, and there are very clear regulations that separate legitimate acts of armed resistance from acts of armed resistance that are not legitimate.
Speaker E: The attacks of October 7, where did they land? For you?
Speaker D: There has been almost exclusive focus on the attacks on civilian population centers and the killings of civilians on October 7. What is much, much less discussed to the point of amnesia is that there were very extensive attacks on israeli military and intelligence facilities on October 7. I would make a very clear distinction between those two. And secondly, I'm not sure that I would characterize the efforts by Palestinians on October 7 to seize israeli territory and israeli population centers, as in and of themselves illegitimate.
Speaker A: You mean attacking israeli civilians legitimate?
Speaker D: No, no, that's not what I said.
Speaker A: I didn't understand what you said.
Speaker D: I think what you had on October 7 was an effort by Hamas to seize israeli territory and populations and kill civilians. That's not what I said. What I said is I think I would not describe the effort to seize israeli territory, as in and of itself illegitimate, as a separate issue from the killing of israeli civilians. In those cases where they had been deliberately targeted, that's very clearly illegitimate.
Speaker A: Those families were slaughtered in kibbutz, but.
Speaker D: I'm making many of them left wingers.
Speaker A: Accidentally, who helped Palestinians go to hospitals in Israel and so on, again, drove palestinian cancer patients to hospitals.
Speaker D: Again, I'm making a distinction.
Speaker A: You don't seem to be very condemnatory of what the Hamas did.
Speaker D: Well, I don't do selective condemnation.
Speaker A: I'm not talking about selective condemnation. I don't do selective condemnation of this specific.
Speaker D: Well, you know what. You know what it is. You know, I would.
Speaker A: I would, for example, condemn israeli assaults on civilians. Deliberate assaults on civilians. Yes, I would condemn them. But you're not doing that. You know Hamas.
Speaker D: You know what the issue is. I've been speaking in public now, I would say, since the late 1980s and interviewed and so on. I have never, on one occasion, ever been asked to condemn any israeli act when I've been in group discussions, those supporting the israeli action or perspective, I have never encountered an example where these individuals are asked to condemn what Israel is doing. The demand and obligation of condemnation is exclusively applied, and my personal experience over decades is exclusively applied to Palestinians.
Speaker A: Israel is condemned day and night on every television channel, on every.
Speaker D: I'm telling you about a personal experience lasting decades.
Speaker B: Quote. Oh, no, I'm trying to quote what you just said.
Speaker A: I shouldn't have said anything. At any point.
Speaker B: You should say, Professor Morris.
Speaker A: Yes.
Speaker B: You just said, I would condemn any time Israel deliberately attacks civilians. Okay, the problem, Professor Morris, is over and over again you claim, in the face of overwhelming evidence, that they didn't attack civilians.
Speaker A: That's not true. I've said civilians, professor. Israel attacks extensively about. I know that in Kafir Qassim, the civilians.
Speaker B: And now let's.
Speaker A: You're just eliminating, selecting.
Speaker B: Cherry pick, if I were you.
Speaker A: Cherry picked.
Speaker B: So let's fast forward when you were an adult. What did you say about the 1982 Lebanon war?
Speaker A: What did I say?
Speaker B: You don't remember? Okay, allow me. Okay. So it happens that I was not at all, by any I had no interest in the Israel Palestine conflict as a young man until the 19. This is true. Until the 1982 Lebanon war.
Speaker A: Yeah, lost the passage.
Speaker B: I'll find it.
Speaker C: Okay, real quick, while he's searching for that.
Speaker B: Yeah, allow me.
Speaker C: You bring up something that's really important that a lot of people don't draw a distinction between, in that there is just causes for war and there is just ways to act within a war. And these two things principally do have a distinction from one another.
Speaker D: Correct.
Speaker C: However, while I appreciate the recognition of the distinction, the idea that the cause for war that Hamas was engaged in, I don't believe if we look at their actions in war or the statements that they've made, it doesn't seem like it had to do with territorial acquisition.
Speaker D: No, no, no.
Speaker C: The point taking land.
Speaker D: No, the point I was making was what was Hamas trying to achieve militarily on October 7? And I was pointing out that the focus has been very much on Hamas attacks on civilians and atrocities and so on. And I'm not saying those things should be ignored. What im saying is that whats getting lost in the shuffle is that there were extensive attacks on military and intelligence facilities. And as far as, lets say, the other aspects are concerned, because I think either you or lex asked me about the legitimacy of these attacks, I said im unclear whether efforts by Hamas to seize israeli population centers in and of themselves are illegitimate, as opposed to actions that either deliberately targeted israeli civilians or actions that should reasonably have been expected to result in the killings of israeli civilians. Those strike me as, by definition, illegitimate. And I want to be very clear about that. Illegitimate means you condemn them, illegitimate means they are not legitimate. I have a problem condemning your side.
Speaker A: Yes.
Speaker D: No, not condemning my side. I have a problem with selective outrage and I have a problem with selective condemnation. And as I explained to you a few minutes ago, in my decades of appearing in public and being interviewed, I have never seen, I have never been asked to condemn an israeli action. I've never been asked for a moral judgment on an israeli action. Exclusive request for condemnation has to do with what Palestinians do. And just as importantly, I'm sure if you watch BBC or CNN, when is the last time an israeli spokesperson has been asked to condemn an israeli act? I've never seen it.
Speaker C: I don't think we condemn the arab side either, though.
Speaker E: Right?
Speaker C: I don't think there's any condemnation, no.
Speaker D: But now that we're talking about israeli victims, all of a sudden, morality is.
Speaker C: Well, I think the reason why it comes up is because there's no shortage of international condemnation for Israel. As norm will point out a million times that there are 50 billion UN resolutions. You've got amnesia international, you've got multiple bodies of the UN. You've got now this case for the ICJ. So there's no question of if there's condemnation. But.
Speaker D: Sorry, if I can interrupt you. In 1948, the entire world stood behind the establishment of a jewish state. In the entire world. No.
Speaker A: Except the arab states and the muslim states. Well, not the entire world.
Speaker D: Okay. But I think you know what I mean by that.
Speaker A: The western democracies. That's what you're saying.
Speaker C: Well, then also, just my quick question.
Speaker A: Supported the establishment of Israel.
Speaker C: My quick question was you said that you believe that this is a very short one. You don't have to. It's just. You think that there's an argument to be made that the people in Gaza, that Hamas and islamic jad, whoever participated, had a just cause for war. Maybe they didn't do it in the correct way, but they maybe had a just cause for war.
Speaker D: I don't think there's a maybe there. The Palestinians.
Speaker C: Okay. You think they absolutely had a just cause for it. Do you think that Israel has a just cause for operations towards of iron?
Speaker D: No, of course not.
Speaker C: Okay.
Speaker B: All right.
Speaker C: You can say your quote.
Speaker B: Okay, first of all, on this issue of double standards, which is the one that irks or irritates moin, you said that you are not a person of double standards. Unlike I, people like Moin, you hold high a single standard, and you condemn deliberate israeli attacks on civilians when they occur. Yeah, and I would say that's true for the period up till 1967. And I think it's accurate. Your account of the first intifada there. It seems to me you were in conformity with most mainstream accounts. And the case of the first intifada, you also used, surprisingly, you used arab human rights sources like al Haq, which I think Muin worked for during the first intifada. That's true. But then something very strange happens. So let's illustrate it.
Speaker A: Wait, there's something strange which happened is the Arabs rejecting.
Speaker B: Okay, wait.
Speaker D: Peace offers by accepting the Oslo agreement.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker C: By rejecting each time a Camp David.
Speaker B: If we have time. I know the record very well. I'd be very happy to go through it with you. But let's get to those double standards. So this is what you have to say about Israel's invasion of Lebanon in 1982. You said, Israel, Washington, reluctant to harm civilians, sought to avoid casualties on both sides and took care not to harm lebanese and palestinian civilians. He then went on to acknowledge the massive use of IDF firepower against civilians during the siege of Beirut, which traumatized israeli society. Morris quickly enters the caveat that Israel tried to pinpoint military targets, but inevitably many civilians were hit. That's your description of the Lebanon war? As I say, that's when I first got involved in the conflict. I am a voracious reader. I read everything on the Lebanon war. I would say there is not a single account of the Lebanon war in which the estimates are between 15 and 20,000 palestinian Lebanese were killed, overwhelmingly civilians. The biggest bloodletting until the current Gaza genocide. Biggest bloodletting, I would say. I can't think of a single mainstream account that remotely approximates what you just said. So, leaving aside, I can name the books voluminous, huge volumes. I'll just take one example. Now, you will remember, because I think you served in Lebanon in 80 02:00 a.m. i. Correct on that?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Yeah. So you will remember that dove Yarmia kept the war diary. So, with your permission, allow me to describe what he wrote during his diary. So he writes, the war machine of the IDF is galloping and trampling over the conquered territory, demonstrating a total insensitivity to the fate of the Arabs who are found in its path. A PLO run hospital suffered a direct hit. Thousands of refugees are returning to the city. When they arrive at their homes, many of which have been destroyed or damaged, you hear their cries of pain and their howls over the deaths of their loved ones. The air is permeated with the smell of destruction and continuing. Does that sound like your description of the Lebanon war?
Speaker A: Forget my descriptions for credit. The point you're making. Let me just finish my sentence. The point you're making, which you somehow forget, is that there are Israelis who strongly criticize their own side and describe how Israelis are doing things which they regard as immoral. You don't find that on the arab side?
Speaker B: I'm talking about Mister Morris. I'm not talking about devil. Meow is the left talking about you? The historian. How did you depict the Lebanon?
Speaker A: Because I believe that the israeli military tried to avoid committing a civilian cast.
Speaker B: By Robert Fisk and pity the next.
Speaker A: Journalist I know has always been right.
Speaker B: So that's why you can say with such confidence that you don't commit, you don't condemn deliberate israeli attacks on. Because there weren't any.
Speaker A: No, I didn't say there weren't any.
Speaker B: Yeah, you didn't.
Speaker A: You agreed that I have condemned israeli attacks?
Speaker B: Yes, there are civilians. I never quarrel with facts. Your. Your description of the 1982 war is so shocking, it makes my innards writhe. And then your description of the second intifada, your description of defensive shield.
Speaker A: When the Arabs were bombing suicide bombers, arab suicide bombers were destroying Jews in masses and buses and in restaurants. That's the second intifada. Do you remember that? You can try suicide bombers in Jerusalem's buses.
Speaker B: I am completely aware of that. But if you forgot the numbers, it was three to one.
Speaker A: The number killed mostly armed palestinian.
Speaker B: That's what you say, but that's not what Amnesty International said. That's not what human rights was.
Speaker A: I don't remember what they said.
Speaker B: I do. No, that's not what.
Speaker A: They're right. I don't know whether their figures are right. My figures are right.
Speaker B: Listen, listen.
Speaker A: In the second, rather, some four Palestinians, Professor Morris, most of them armed people. And Israelis, that's a thousand Israelis were killed, almost all of them.
Speaker B: No, Professor Morris, fantasy. But I'm not going to argue with here. Here's a simple challenge. You said not to look at the camera. Scares the people. I'll make the open challenge.
Speaker A: You are going to scare them.
Speaker B: No, Professor Morris, open challenge. Words are in print. I wrote 50 pages analyzing all of your work. I quote, some will say cherry pick, but I think accurately quote you. Here's a simple. Answer me in print. Answer what I wrote and show where I'm making things up. Answer me in print.
Speaker A: I'm sorry, I'm not familiar with.
Speaker B: That's no problem. You're a busy man. You're an important historian. You don't have to know everything that's in print, especially by modest publishers. But now you know. And so here's the public challenge. You answer and show where I cherry picked, where I misrepresented.
Speaker A: Send me the article.
Speaker B: Fine. And then we can have a civil, scholarly discussion.
Speaker A: I'm not sure we will agree, even.
Speaker B: If we don't have to agree. It's for the reader to decide, looking at both sides, where this truth stands.
Speaker E: And if I may ask, it's good to discuss ideas that are in the air now, as opposed to citing literature that was written in the past as much as possible, because listeners were not familiar with the literature. So, like, whatever was written, just express it. Condense the key idea, and then we can debate the ideas.
Speaker B: There are two aspects. There's a public debate, but there's also written words.
Speaker E: Yes. I'm just telling you that you, as an academic historian, put a lot of value in the written word, and I think it is valuable. But in this, he's incidentally, not the.
Speaker A: Only historian who puts value to words. I also do, actually, more than just.
Speaker C: One or two sentences at a time.
Speaker E: But in this context, just for the.
Speaker B: Educational purpose of teaching people, why would people commit what I have to acknowledge, because I am faithful to the facts. Massive atrocities on October 7. Why did that happen? And I think that's the problem. The past is erased, and we suddenly went from 1948 to October 7, 2023, and there is a problem there.
Speaker E: So, first of all, you have complete freedom to backtrack, and we'll go there with you. Obviously, we can't cover every single year, every single event, but there's probably critical moments in time.
Speaker C: Can I respond to something relating to the Lebanon war? I looked up the book that he got this from and what the quote was from. It sounds cold to say it, but war is tragic and civilians die. There is no war. That this has not happened in. In the history of all of humankind. The statement that Israel might take care not to target civilians is not incompatible with a diary entry from someone who said they saw civilians getting killed. I think that sometimes we do a lot of weird games when we talk about international humanitarian law or laws that govern conflict, where we say things like civilians dying as a war crime or civilian homes or hospitals getting destroyed as necessarily a war crime, or is necessarily somebody intentionally targeting civilians without making distinctions between military targets or civilian ones. I think that when we analyze different attacks or when we talk about the conduct of a military, I think it's important to understand, like perspectively from the unit of analysis of the actual military committing the acts, what's happening and what are the decisions being made, rather than just saying retrospectively, oh, well, a lot of civilians died. Not very many military people died, comparatively speaking. So it must have been war crimes, especially when you've got another side. Fast forward to Hamas, that intentionally attempts to induce those same civilian numbers, because Hamas is guilty of any war crime that you would potentially accuse. And this is according to the Amnesty International people that norm loves to cite. Hamas is guilty of all of these same war crimes, of them failing to take care of the civilian population, of them, essentially utilizing human shields to try to fire rockets free from attacks.
Speaker B: Essentially.
Speaker C: Essentially, yes. I'm just saying that essentially in terms of how international law defines it, not how Amnesty International defines it, but Amnesty International describes times of human shielding, but they don't actually apply the correct international legal standard. I. Absolutely. I'm just saying. I'm just saying believe it or not, normal. The entire Geneva conventions is all on Wikipedia. It's a wonderful website. But I'm just saying that on the Hamas side, if there's an attempt to induce this type of military activity, attempt to induce civilian harm, that it's not just enough to say, like, well, here's a diary entry where a guy talks about how tragic.
Speaker D: I think the problem with your statement is that if you go back and listen to it, the first part of it is war is hell. Civilians die. It's a fact of life. And you state that in a very factual matter. Then when you start talking about Hamas, all of a sudden you've discovered morality and you've discovered condemnation, and you've discovered intent, and you are unfortunately, far from alone in this. I'll give you. I'll give you. You know who, for me, is a perfect example.
Speaker A: Speaker one.
Speaker C: Wait, hold on. Just something. We don't need examples.
Speaker D: No.
Speaker C: The false equivalency of the two sides is astounding. When Hamas kills civilians in a surprise attack on October 7, this isn't because they are attempting to target military targets and they happen to stumble into a giant festival of people that.
Speaker D: Well, they did happen to stumble into it.
Speaker C: They did, but they're not. But when they stumbled into it, it wasn't an issue of trying to figure out a military. They weren't failing in distinction. There wasn't a proportionality assessment done. It was just to kill civilians. Even the Amnesty International in 2008 and in 2014 and even today will continue to. I don't think there's any.
Speaker D: Find anyone who will deny that Hamas has targeted civilians. Sure, you gave the example, but there's a difference. Of suicide bombings during the second intifada. I mean, facts are facts.
Speaker C: Sure, but I'm saying that the Hamas targeting of civilians is different than the incidental loss of life that occurs when Israel does.
Speaker D: How, you know, genocide is the intentional mass murder.
Speaker C: Genocide is an entirely separate claim.
Speaker D: Yeah, but the idea that Israel is not in the business of intentionally targeting civilians. I know that's what we're supposed to believe, but the historical record stands.
Speaker A: No, no, that doesn't.
Speaker D: Clearly, I don't believe it does. You've written about.
Speaker C: Well, when you say historical, do you mean like in the forties to the. Or do you mean like over the past, like that?
Speaker D: From the thirties of the last century to the twenties of this century? I just like to make, you know, you, the way you characterized it. I think the best example of that I've come across during this specific conflict is John Kirby, the White House spokesman. I've named him tears tossed around for a very good reason. When he's talking about palestinian civilian deaths, war is hell. You know, it's a fact of life. Get used to it. When he was confronted with israeli civilian deaths on October 7, he literally broke down tears.
Speaker A: He understood that one is deliberate and one isn't. He understood that?
Speaker D: No, that's what he tried to make us.
Speaker A: No, no. He was speaking facts. The Hamas guys who attacked the kibbutzim, apart from the attacks on the military sites, when they attacked the kibbutzim, were out to kill civilians, and they killed family after family, house after house. The israeli attacks on Hamas installations and fighters. No, you don't know israeli pilots. That's the problem.
Speaker B: Thank God.
Speaker A: You know. No, you don't know israeli pilots. They believe that they are killing hamasniks. They're given searches.
Speaker C: Sure.
Speaker A: They believe it. And if the Hamas hiding behind civilians, civilians die every time they talk, every.
Speaker B: Time they target a kid. I'm sure they believe it's Hamas. When they. Kid. Yeah, with the. Yeah. When they killed the four kids in the. They believe. Yeah, I know. They believe. Even though they were the miniative side. You know, even though they were. Let's leave aside.
Speaker C: I know what he's quoting correctly. You've lied about this instance in the past. Those kids weren't just on the beach, as is often stated articles. Those kids were literally coming out of a pretty previously identified Hamas compound that they have separated from. They literally did.
Speaker B: With all due respect, you're such a fantastic moron. It's terrifying. That wharf was filled with journalists. There were tens, scores of journalists. That was an old fisherman's shack. What are you talking about? Talking about? It's so painful. It's so painful to listen to this idiocy.
Speaker C: And to be clear, on the other side, you're implying that a strike was okayed on the israeli side, where they said, we're just gonna kill four palestinian children today for no reason.
Speaker B: Do you believe that?
Speaker C: Do you believe that.
Speaker A: They were children?
Speaker B: Here we go.
Speaker C: They will never answer that question.
Speaker B: I will answer the question.
Speaker A: Pilots will out there.
Speaker C: I will even have children, because that was a strike. That was a drone strike, so it was approved. All we have to say that we're going to kill children today.
Speaker B: Do you want me to answer, or do you want your motor mouth to go? Okay, answer. In 2018, there was the great march of return in Gaza. By all reckonings of human rights organizations and journalists who were there, it was overwhelmingly nonviolent.
Speaker A: But organized by the Hamas.
Speaker B: What? Whoever organized.
Speaker D: Organized by Satan. Let's start.
Speaker B: Satan. I agree. Let's. Let's go for the big one, the big Megillah. It's Satan. Okay. Overwhelmingly organized, overwhelmingly nonviolent. Resembled at the beginning, the first bombs, here and there. First intifada represent the first. Okay. Not bombs, but they tried to make.
Speaker A: Holes in the space.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: Obviously.
Speaker B: Let's continue. Yeah, so.
Speaker A: But I'm not sure Israel behaved morally in that thing.
Speaker B: Okay, okay.
Speaker A: No, no, no.
Speaker B: Okay, wait, wait, wait, wait.
Speaker A: I'm willing to grant.
Speaker B: Please, please.
Speaker A: I'm willing to.
Speaker B: Allow me to.
Speaker A: You don't have to proceed. I'm willing to.
Speaker B: Allow me. Allow me to finish.
Speaker D: I don't know anything about this. I'd like.
Speaker B: Okay, so, as you know, along the Gaza perimeter, there was Israel's best trained snipers, correct?
Speaker A: I don't know. Best training.
Speaker B: It was fine.
Speaker A: Snipers.
Speaker B: Okay, all right. Hey, laugh. It's hilarious. The story is so funny, you're lying.
Speaker C: About aspects of violence to it.
Speaker B: According.
Speaker C: Even the UN says it themselves. Okay, but you only select what the UN says that you like.
Speaker B: Sure. The problem, mister Morelli, is you don't know the english language. You don't know.
Speaker C: I can read from the UN website itself. In regards to the great march of return, they said majority of protesters acted in a peaceful manner. During most protests, dozens have approached the fence, attempting to damage it, burning tires, throwing stones and Molotov cocktails towards israeli forces flying incendiary kites and balloons into israeli territory. The latter resulting in extensive damage to agricultural land and nature reserves inside Israel, and risk the lives of israeli civilians. Some incidents of shooting an explosives.
Speaker B: Talk fast. Talk fast. I'm just trying to think that you're coherent.
Speaker C: I'm just reading from the UN.
Speaker B: Yeah, but you like the guy and.
Speaker C: They agree with you.
Speaker B: You got the months wrong. You got the months wrong. We're talking about the beginning. In March 30, 2021.
Speaker C: You described that march. Mostly peaceful.
Speaker B: Speaker. Okay, allow me to finish. So there were the snipers. Okay, now you find it so far fetched. Israelis purposely, deliberately targeting civilians. That's such a far fetched idea. An overwhelmingly nonviolent march. What did the international.
Speaker A: It was a campaign.
Speaker B: Whatever you want to call.
Speaker A: For months.
Speaker B: Whatever you want to call.
Speaker A: Months.
Speaker B: Yeah. What did the UN investigation find?
Speaker A: Well, he just read.
Speaker B: I read the report. I don't read things off of those machines. I read the report. What did it find? Brace yourself. You thought it was so funny, the idea of IDF targeting civilians. It found.
Speaker A: Go look.
Speaker B: This up on your machine.
Speaker C: I already know what you're gonna say. You're gonna say it. Found that only one or two of.
Speaker B: Them were justified killings, targeted journalists, targeted medics. And here's the funniest one of all. It's so hilarious. They targeted disabled people who were 300 meters away from the fence and just standing by trees. If it's true.
Speaker E: Just quick pause. I think everything was fascinating to listen to except the mention of hilarious. Nobody finds any of this hilarious. And if any of us are laughing, it's not at the suffering of civilians or suffering of anyone. It's at the obvious joyful camaraderie in the room. I'm enjoying it and also the joy of learning. So thank you.
Speaker C: Can we talk about the targeting civilian thing a little bit? I think there's like an important underlying. Not necessarily that. I just. I think it's important to understand. Yeah, I think it's important to understand. There's like three different things here that we need to think about. So one is a policy of killing civilians. Do we. So I would ask the other side. I'm gonna ask all three. Cause I know there won't be a short answer. Do you think there is a policy top down from the IDF to target civilians? That's one thing. A second thing is he said yes when I. Yeah, sure. Yeah, that's fine. But then the second thing is. Or there's. There's two distinctions I want to draw between. I think Benny would say this. I would say this. I am sure. Undoubtedly there have been cases where IDF soldiers, for no good reason, have targeted and killed Palestinians that they should not have done that would be prosecutable as war crimes, as defined by the rum statue and the IDF.
Speaker A: Some have been prosecuted.
Speaker C: Yeah. And I'm absolutely sure.
Speaker B: Practically none.
Speaker C: Sure. I'm sure. I'm sure that we would all agree for soldiers if that happens. But I think that it's important. I think that it's important that when we talk about military strikes or when we talk about things, especially involving bombings or drone attacks, these are things that are signed off by multiple different layers of command, by multiple people involved in an operation, including intelligence gathering, including weaponeering. And there also have typically lawyers involved. When you make the claim that an IDF soldier shot a Palestinian, those three people, the three hostages that came up with white flags and something horrible happened, I think that's a fair statement to make and I think a lot of criticism is deserved. But when you make the statement that four children were killed by a strike, the claim that you're making. Yeah.
Speaker B: Deliberately. Yeah.
Speaker C: The claim that you're making. The claim that you're making is that multiple levels of the idea of signed off on just killing have no idea what. If you don't understand the process, then let me educate you. I can tell you I do understand the process. I'm telling you right now, no basic military. Anybody aside from Wikipedia, can you tell me what your knowledge work in the military?
Speaker B: What's your knowledge of the idea?
Speaker C: Audience can look this up. Do you think that. Do you think that. Do you think that bombing and strikes are decided by one person in the field? Do you think one person can I respond to airplane on drone strikes that are designed to figure out how to strike and who to strike. So when you say that four children are targeted, you're saying that a whole apparatus is trying to murder Palestinian.
Speaker B: You meant my argument better than this ridiculous argument because really that it's impossible at the command level. It's impossible at that command level. But you said that they couldn't have done it at the bottom if it weren't.
Speaker C: Also, you don't understand the strength of the claim that you're making. You're saying that from a top down level that lawyers, multiple commanders tell me what I'm understand or Palestinians.
Speaker B: It's true. It's true. I don't spend my nights on Wikipedia. I read books. I admit that as a signal. I know books are a waste of time.
Speaker C: With all due regard, two or three.
Speaker B: Quotes that you use, I completely respect the fact, and I'll say it on the air as much as I find totally disgusting. What's come of your politics? A lot of the books are excellent. And I'll even tell you, because I'm not afraid of saying it. Whenever I have to check on the basic fact, the equivalent of going to the Britannica, I go to your books. I know you got a lot of the facts right.
Speaker E: Benny Moore's listener.
Speaker B: I would never say books are a waste of time. And it's regrettable to you that you got strapped with a partner who thinks that all the wisdom. All the wisdom.
Speaker A: He didn't say they're a waste of time.
Speaker D: I'd like to respond to what you were saying. I think the question that we're trying.
Speaker A: To answer, I think you don't understand Israel.
Speaker D: Let me finish.
Speaker A: Really understands Israel, how it works.
Speaker D: I think we're all agreed that Palestinians have deliberately targeted civilians. Whether we're talking about Hamas and Islamic Jihad today or previously.
Speaker A: I prefer the word murdered and raped rather than targeted. Targeted is too soft for what the Hamas did.
Speaker C: I'm.
Speaker D: Okay, I'm not talking about.
Speaker A: I'm talking about this now.
Speaker D: Yeah, but I'm trying to answer his question.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker D: Historically, there is substantial evidence that Palestinians have targeted civilians. Whether. Whether it's been incidental or systematic is a different discussion. I don't want to get into that now. For some reason, there seems to be a huge debate about whether any Israeli has ever sunk so low as to target a civilian.
Speaker A: No, we've agreed both this has happened.
Speaker D: Here, and I think.
Speaker A: Agreed on that.
Speaker D: Okay. I think what we're saying is it's.
Speaker A: Not policy, which is what you guys are implying, that they kill civilians deliberately.
Speaker D: If I understand you correctly, you're basically making the claim that none of these attacks could have happened without going through an entire chain of commitment for strike.
Speaker C: Cells that are involved in, like, drone attacks or plane attacks or.
Speaker D: Yes, my understanding of the israeli military. And you could perhaps you've served in it, you would know better. It's actually a fairly chaotic organization.
Speaker A: No, no, that's not true. Especially not the air force. Extremely, extremely organized. The air force works in a very organized fashion, as he says, with lawyers, chain of command, and ultimately the pilot drops the bomb where he's told to drop it.
Speaker C: Was that 200 strikes in, like, 60 seconds? I think. I think at the opening of protective edge, like. Yeah, the coordination between. You're talking about 2008, I think, was 2014. But I'm just saying that the coordination in the military is pretty tight.
Speaker D: My understanding of the israeli military is that it's quite chaotic, and there's also a lot of testimonies from Israel. But be that as it may, okay, I'm prepared to accept both of your contentions that it's a highly organized and disciplined force. Air force, under any scenario, is going to be more organized than the other branches. And you're saying such a strike would have been inconceivable?
Speaker C: Well, I'm not necessarily saying inconceivable. I'm just saying that, like, that would have required.
Speaker D: Okay. You're basically murderous, and for so many people, yes.
Speaker C: I don't think good evidence has been presented to say that that's the.
Speaker D: Your basic claim is that it would be fair to assume that such a strike could have only been carried out with multiple levels of authorization and signing off. Okay, let's accept that for the sake of argument. We have now seen incident after incident after incident after incident where entire families are vaporized in single strikes.
Speaker A: Who is in the families, who lives in the house, family members. No one's next to the house in.
Speaker D: Which these families we have seen incident.
Speaker A: Do you know that Hamasniks weren't in that house? Do you know that their ammunition dumps weren't?
Speaker D: Why do I have to prove a negative?
Speaker A: You're saying that they deliberately targeted families? If Israel wanted to kill civilians in Gaza, they could have killed 500,000 by now. With the number of. The fact that they've only killed a.
Speaker D: Certain small number, 30,000 is a small number in proportion. You consider 30,000 small number in proportion.
Speaker A: Over four months probably is an indication that targeted and that there are Hamas targets in these places.
Speaker D: So I've given children is only.
Speaker B: And if that's the case, why is it? Yeah, you said only. Only, though. Professor Morris, here's a question for you. If we take every combat zone in the world for the past three years, every combat zone in the world.
Speaker A: In Vietnam, the Americans killed a million people.
Speaker D: 40 million.
Speaker B: I wasn't. Yeah, I was again, in the anti war movement, so don't strap me the million people. Fine, fine. And. And 30 million Russians were killed. So in world War two. So everything else is irrelevant. Okay, here's the question, Professor Morris. Here's a question. It's very perplexing. If you take every combat zone in the world for the past three years, and you multiply the number of children killed by four, every combat zone, the world. You get gossip. Okay, so when you.
Speaker C: What is it proposed to prove?
Speaker B: Okay, I'm gonna. I'm gonna tell you.
Speaker A: Firstly, you're a lion.
Speaker D: Shut up.
Speaker A: You're relying.
Speaker B: No, I'm not relying on the numbers that everybody else.
Speaker C: I'm lying in the numbers, though. What is that?
Speaker A: Those are mass numbers.
Speaker B: Okay, okay.
Speaker A: Which may not be true.
Speaker B: Fine.
Speaker A: They could invent anything because you know that they are a menacious organization.
Speaker B: I know. Mendacious, believe me. You like mendacious, as in the Israeli Ministry of Foreign affairs. Okay, so here's the thing. You say they could have killed 500,000, but they only killed only. That's your word. I'm not only killed 30,000.
Speaker A: You believe that they deliberately target civilians. They would have killed many more.
Speaker B: The fact is that they don't target civilians, Morris, for. And you don't understand, for a historian. I don't want to understand israeli society. You want to know the truth. I don't want to. I don't want to get inside their heads.
Speaker A: That's the problem.
Speaker B: 90% of the Israelis.
Speaker A: A good historian, tries to get into the heads of.
Speaker B: There's a limit. There's a limit when 90% of Israelis think that Israel is using enough. Orlando. Too little force in Gaza. I don't want to get inside that head. 40% think that Israel is using insufficient force in Gaza. I don't want to get inside that head. I don't want to get inside. Ahead of people who think they're using insufficient force against the population. Against a population, half of which is children. I don't want to get inside that head. But here is the point. Because your partner wants to know the point. You don't understand political constraints. One of your ministers said, let's drop an atomic bomb on you.
Speaker A: Really meant that?
Speaker D: He said it. Three years.
Speaker A: No, no, no. It was said in a sort of a professor Morris questionable way. He didn't say they should drop.
Speaker D: I'm not supporting him.
Speaker A: He's an idiot, this minister. He didn't say dropping a.
Speaker B: None other than Israel's chief historian, the famed, justifiably famed Benny Morris thinks we should be dropping nuclear weapons on Iran.
Speaker A: Iran has for years, its leaders for years have said we should destroy Israel. You agree with that? They've said we should destroy Israel. Israel must be destroyed. Is that correct? This is what the iranian leaders have been saying since Khomeini.
Speaker B: I would say iranian leaders have sent mixed messages.
Speaker A: Okay. Okay. But some of them have said, including.
Speaker C: The Houthis, are complicated to the extent.
Speaker B: That the Houthis are trying to stop the genocide. In God's eyes. I support.
Speaker C: I know I selectively support international law when it agrees with you, and then when it doesn't, you decide to throw international.
Speaker B: Norm, let me read what you said. Norm.
Speaker E: Norm, stop. Please. Norm, just for me, please. Just give me a second. You said that there's no genocide going on in Gaza. Let me ask that clear question, the same question I asked on Hamas attacks. Is there, from a legal, philosophical, moral perspective, is there genocide going on in Gaza today?
Speaker D: Is there a genocide going on in Gaza? Well, in several years, we will have a definitive response to that question. What has happened thus far is that on the 29 December, the Republic of South Africa instituted proceedings against Israel pursuant to the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the crime of genocide. South Africa basically accused Israel of perpetrating genocide in the Gaza Strip. On the 26 January, the court issued its initial ruling. The court at this stage is not making a determination on whether Israel has or has nothing committed genocide. So just as it has not found Israel guilty, it certainly also hasn't found Israel innocent. What the court had to do at this stage was take one of two decisions. Either South Africa's case was the equivalent of a frivolous lawsuit and dismiss it and close the proceedings, or it had to determine that South Africa presented a plausible case that Israel was violating its obligations under the genocide convention and that it would, on that basis, hold a full hearing. Now, a lot of people have looked at the court's ruling of the 26 January and focused on the fact that the court did not order a ceasefire. I actually wasn't expecting it to order a ceasefire, and I wasn't surprised that it didn't, because in the other cases that the court has considered, most prominently Bosnia and Myanmar, it also didn't order a ceasefire. And South Africa, in requesting a ceasefire, also didn't ask the court to render an opinion on the legitimacy, or lack thereof, of Israel's. Israel's military operation. From my perspective, the key issue on the 26 January was whether the court would simply dismiss the case or decide to proceed with it.
Speaker A: And it decided to proceed.
Speaker D: We decided to proceed. And I think that's enormously. I thought that was enormous.
Speaker A: But you said they committed genocide. You already said they committed genocide. It's committing genocide.
Speaker B: But if I can just allow me, allow me. That's correct. Now, I don't run away.
Speaker A: So, Norman, you did say he's running.
Speaker E: Can you let me finish?
Speaker D: Well, the end of the story is you specifically asked whether I think Israel is committing genocide. I explained formally there is no finding. And as you said, we won't know for a number of years. And I think there's legitimate questions to be raised. I mean, in the Bosnia case, which I think all four of us would agree was clearly a case of justice. Genocide, the court determined.
Speaker A: You mean by the Serbs?
Speaker D: Yes. In the Bosnia case, the court determined that of all the evidence placed before them, only Srebrenica qualified as genocide and all the other atrocities committed did not qualify as genocide. You know, international law is a developing organism. I don't know how the court is going to respond in this case, so I wouldn't take it as a foregone conclusion how the court is going to respond.
Speaker A: But Norman has determined already.
Speaker D: I have, too, because you're asking my personal opinion. Personal opinion is also so as a matter of law, I want to state very clearly it has not been determined and won't be determined for several years. Based on my observations and the evidence before me, I would say it's indisputable that Israel is engaged in a genocidal assault against the palestinian people in the Gaza Strip.
Speaker B: Yeah, with the program, the PLO is long.
Speaker D: Pastor, as you were saying, genocide is not a body count. Genocide consists of two elements. The destruction of a people in whole or in part. So in other words, you can commit genocide by killing 30,000 people. It doesn't have. Well, five probably is below the threshold. Yes, but I think 30,000 crosses the threshold and not reaching 500,000 is probably relevant. And the second element is there has to be an intent. In other words.
Speaker A: And you believe there's an intent?
Speaker D: Yes. I think if there is any other plausible reason for why all these people are being murdered, it's not genocide. And as far as intent is, what.
Speaker A: About hiding behind a human shield? You don't think that's the reason for them being killed?
Speaker D: Well, let's get the intent part out of the way first. South Africa's.
Speaker A: Forget South Africa. I'd like to finish government. That's got nothing to do with anything.
Speaker D: I think they're pro Satan as well. Last time. No, they're pro Hamas for some reason. You don't have a problem with people being pro Israeli at the time of. Of this. But if they support Palestinians right to life or self determination, they get demonized and delegitimized as prohibited.
Speaker A: An organization which murdered 1200 people deliberately. That's my point.
Speaker D: But supporting a state that has murdered 30,000.
Speaker A: But they haven't, because these are. 30,000 are basically human, used by the Hamas, in which the Hamas normally wanted killed. They wanted them killed. If I. Hamas wanted these people.
Speaker D: If I could just get.
Speaker A: You don't think they wanted them killed? No, I don't provide them with shelters. They build tunnels for their fighters, but not one shelter for their own civilian.
Speaker D: You asked me about intent.
Speaker A: Of course they want them killed.
Speaker D: You asked me about intent. And the reason that I bought in the south african application is because it is actually exceptionally detailed on intent. By quoting numerous sorts of idiotic ministers in Israel. Well, yeah. Including the prime minister, the defense minister, the chief of staff.
Speaker A: Didn't say genocide.
Speaker D: No, he said, according to Asa.
Speaker A: Use the word.
Speaker B: According to Natasha, if I may. According to Asa Kasher, the philosopher of the IDF. Yeah. He said that Netanyahu was avowing genocide. So he's an idiot.
Speaker A: So the idiot. But he is past it.
Speaker D: So the reason I raised the south african application is twofold. Hamas or no Hamas, it's exceptionally detailed on the question of. On the question of intent. And secondly, when the International Court of justice issues a ruling, individual justices have the right, can give their own opinion. And I found the german one to be the most interesting on this specific question, because he was basically saying that he didn't think South Africa presented a persuasive case, but he said their section on intent was so overpowering that he felt he was left with no choice but to vote with the majority. So I think that answers the intent part of your question.
Speaker C: So, for the ICJ case that South Africa has brought, I think there's a couple things that need to be mentioned. One is, and I saw you two talk at length about this, the plausibility standard is incredibly low. The only thing we're looking for is a basic presentation of facts that make it conceivable possible that plausible, which legally, this is obviously below criminal conviction. Below? Yeah, below.
Speaker D: Think of it as an indictment.
Speaker B: Sure.
Speaker C: Possibly, maybe even a lower level than even an indictment. So plausibility is an incredibly low standard, number one. Number two, if you actually go through and you read the complaint that South Africa filed, I would say that if you go through the quotes and you even follow through to the source of the quotes, the misrepresentation that South Africa does and their case about all of these horrendous quotes, in my opinion, borders on criminal.
Speaker D: Well, 16 ICJ judges disagree.
Speaker C: That's fine if 16 ICJ judges disagree, but I'm gonna give, you know, they could be.
Speaker B: But even the american judge, she must have been awful incompetent if she was unable to see the misrepresentations that Mister Bonell, based on his Wikipedia entry, was able to find.
Speaker C: So this is based on the official ICJ report that was released. I'm not sure if you read the entire.
Speaker B: I read everything.
Speaker C: Did you go through and actually identify any of the sources for the underlying question?
Speaker B: Actually, brace yourself for this. And Moine could confirm it. Yaniv Kogan, an Israeli, and Jaime Stern Reiner, half Israeli. They checked every single quote in the Hebrew original. And Yaniv Kogin loved the guy. He has terrifying powers of concentration. He checked every single quote, is that correct? Maureen and Jamie checked every single quote in the English, in the context and where there were any contextual questions, they told us.
Speaker D: I think they found one.
Speaker B: Yeah, I think they found one. So I do not believe that those 1615 judges was 15 to 216 to two. I think they're 15 on the court plus two. So it's 17, so it's 15 to two. I don't think those 15 judges were incompetent. And I certainly don't believe the president of the court, an American, would allow herself to be duped.
Speaker C: Okay. Because you might recall Mister Perrel, I.
Speaker E: Think I'm gonna read one.
Speaker C: Sure. So this was taken from the. From the south african complaint. Tons of these.
Speaker B: But.
Speaker C: So here's one. In the complaint for the ICJ, they said that on the 12 October 2023, President Isaac Herzog made clear that Israel was not distinguishing between militants and civilians in Gaza.
Speaker D: Correct.
Speaker C: Stating in a press conference to foreign media in relation to Palestinians in Gaza, over 1 million of whom are children, quote, quote, it's an entire nation out there that is responsible. It is not true, this rhetoric about civilians not aware, not involved.
Speaker D: I saw that before.
Speaker C: It's absolutely not true. And we will fight until we break their backbone. End quote. If you actually go to the news article that they even state, they even link it in their complaint, the full context for the quote was, quote, it is an entire nation out there that is responsible. It's not true, this rhetoric about civilians not being aware, not involved, it's absolutely not true. They could have risen up. They could have fought against that evil regime which took over Gaza in a coup d'etat. But we are at war. We are defending our homes. We are protecting our homes. That's the truth. And when a nation protects its home, it fights. And we will fight until we break their backbone. He acknowledged that many Gazans had nothing to do with Hamas, but was adamant that others did. Quote, I agree there are many innocent Palestinians who don't agree with this. But if you have a missile in your goddamn kitchen and you want to shoot it at me, am I allowed to defend myself? We have to defend ourselves. We have the right to do so. This is not the same as saying there's no deceit distinction between militants and civilians in Gaza. His statement here is actually fully compliant with international law to the letter. Because if you are storing military supplies in civilian areas, these things become military targets, and you're allowed to do proportionality assessments afterwards. So if this is supposed to be one of many quotes that they've shown, that is supposed to demonstrate genocidal intent, but it is very easily explained by military intent or by a conflict between two parties.
Speaker D: I saw that press conference.
Speaker A: Wait, let me just say something. All of this talk is a bit irrelevant because it sounds. It may sound to the listeners that the court in the HAG has ruled that Israel is committing genocide.
Speaker D: No, I think it hasn't.
Speaker A: No, it's just going in the next few years to look at the whole subject. There has been no. No determination at all. And as Stephen says, some of the quotes are not exactly accurate quotes or taken out of total mischaracterization.
Speaker B: Okay. It is correct, as Moine put it, that it will be several years before the court makes a determination.
Speaker A: And my guess is that it will determine there was no genocide. That's my guess, yes. No, I'm just giving you my guess.
Speaker B: I can't predict. I got it all wrong. Actually, as Moine will attest, I got it all wrong the first time. I never thought the american judge would vote again in favor of plausibility.
Speaker A: So you admit that you are wrong?
Speaker B: Yeah, of course. I think I tell Moine twice a day, I was wrong about this and I was wrong about that. I'm not wrong about the facts. I try not to be. But my speculations, they can be wrong. Okay, leaving that aside, first of all, as Moine pointed out, there's a difference between the legal decision by the ruling and an independent judgment. Now, South Africa was not filing a frivolous case. That was 84 pages. It was single.
Speaker A: Even 84 pages can be frivolous.
Speaker C: It takes an hour and a half to read. It was not a massive case.
Speaker B: It was single spaced and had literally hundreds of footnotes.
Speaker A: Can still be frivolous with.
Speaker B: It's possible, of course. Yeah. I read the report. To tell you the truth, I followed very closely everything that's been happening to October 7. I was mesmerized. I couldn't believe the comprehensiveness of that particular report. Number two, there are two quite respected judges. Excuse me. There were two quite respected experts of international law sitting on the south african panel. John Dugard and Vaughan Lowe. Vaughan Lowe, as you might know, he argued the war case in 2004 before the International Court of Justice. Now, they were not. They were alleging genocide, which in their view means the evidence in their minds. We're not yet at the court. The evidence in their minds compels the conclusion that genocide is being committed. I am willing, because I happen to know Mister Dugard personally and have correspond with von Low. I've heard their claim, I've read the report. I would say they make a very strong case. But let's agree plausible. Now here's a question. If somebody qualifies for an Olympic team, let's say a regional person qualifies for Olympic team, it doesn't mean they're going to be on the Olympic team. It doesn't mean they're going to win a gold medal, a silver medal or brown square.
Speaker A: They can swim. That's what you're saying?
Speaker B: No, I would say that's a very high bar.
Speaker A: You're saying they can swim.
Speaker B: To even qualify.
Speaker D: Swim well enough to have a realistic prospect.
Speaker B: Yeah. So to even make it to plausible.
Speaker C: That is not the ego. That is not what plausible means. It is absolutely not.
Speaker B: You're dead, Mister Borelli. Please don't teach me about the english language.
Speaker C: So the declaration of judge, I said.
Speaker B: Lawsuit in the present phase, qualifying.
Speaker C: The court is not asked at this present phase of the proceedings to determine whether South Africa's allegations of genocide are well founded. They're not well founded. They're not even well founded. You said that plausible was a high standard. It is absolutely not. It is a misrepresentation of the strength of the case against Israel. Just like the majority of the quotes they have in this case are you. And also you said it was an extremely well founded case. They spend like one fourth of all of the quotations, some even pulled from the Goldstone report, that try to actually deal with the intent part. Which is, by the way, I think you guys, I don't know if you use the phrase the dolos specialis that the intentional part of genocide.
Speaker D: I don't know that term.
Speaker C: I think it's called dolos specialis. It is the most important part of genocide, which is proving the special. It is a highly special intent to commit genocide.
Speaker B: It's possible that Israel could.
Speaker C: No, the men's. Yes, I understand the state of mind, but in for genocide there is. It's called Dolores specialis. It's a highly special intent. Did you read the case? Yeah, it is highly special intent.
Speaker B: I'm going to ask you again. Yes, please stop displaying your imbecility, okay? On public display that you're a moron. At least have the self possession to shut up. Did I read.
Speaker C: I'm comfortable putting my display on camera. Putting yours in books.
Speaker B: I read the case around four times. I read all of the majority opinion, the declarations. I read Aaron Barack's declaration.
Speaker C: Then why are you lying and saying plausible is a high standard?
Speaker B: Because I said even reaching the benchmark of plausibility is a very high standard in the world. It's the equivalent of a regional player qualifying for an Olympics. It's still two steps removed. You may not be on the team and you may not get a medal, but to get qualified, which in this context is the equivalent of plausible, you must be doing something pretty horrible. As it happens. As it happens.
Speaker A: There was no dentist. That's what the court will rule. Remember what I just told you? The court rules rule.
Speaker B: I don't expect to be even around when the court reaches its final decision.
Speaker A: Why?
Speaker B: It'll take a long, long time.
Speaker A: Two years?
Speaker B: No, I don't think they'll take two or three years.
Speaker D: Bosnia, which was admittedly a special type of case because they were accusing Serbia of sponsoring the bosnian Serbs, that took, I think, 17 years from 90.
Speaker A: I assume they'll take two or three years.
Speaker E: But the point you're making.
Speaker B: So this is illegal, horrible must be happening to even achieve horrible.
Speaker A: It's a war.
Speaker B: Yeah, it's true.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: They weren't rendering a ruling on the war. They were rendering a ruling on the genocide.
Speaker D: And I think, I think this suggests.
Speaker C: That Israel is committing as well.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker D: But I think the problem with, with your characterization is you're saying in so many words, South Africans basically only have to show up in court with a coherent statement.
Speaker A: Right.
Speaker C: That is correct.
Speaker A: In today's atmosphere, that's probably.
Speaker D: They needed to do a lot more. They need, they needed to, they needed, they need to persuade judges, go according.
Speaker A: To what the majority want to hear.
Speaker B: Yeah, but they need presidente.
Speaker D: They needed to persuade the court that it was worth investing several years of their time in hearing. They're well paid whether they take this case or not. I mean, you know, they have a full docket whether they accept or reject this case. And I think, I don't think we should.
Speaker A: Remember what I just said. They won't rule there was genocide. Remember what I said.
Speaker C: Also, I recommend people actually read the case and follow through a lot of the quotes that they just don't show. Genocidal. The israeli minister of finance on the 8 October 2023. This is taken from the ICJ. This is from south african submission. Bizal Smotrik. I can't read this stated. There you go. Okay. At a meeting of the israeli cabinet, that, quote, we need to deal a blow that hasn't been seen in 50 years and take down Gaza, end quote. But again, if you click through and you read the source, their own linked source, it says, as per this own source, quote, the powerful finance minister, settler leader Bezalel Smotrek, I can't pronounce names demanded at the cabinet meeting late Saturday that the army, quote, hit Hamas brutally and not take the matter of the captives into significant consideration, end quote. Quote. In war, as in war, you have to be brutal. End quote. He was quoted as saying, quote, we need to deal a blow that hasn't been seen in 50 years and take down Gaza, end quote. You can't strip the quotation of Hamas, a NCD war with and then pretend.
Speaker A: That there's genocidal intent, that's not genocide.
Speaker C: So when the Ukrainians say, we Russia, that's not genocide. No. When Ukraine says, we need to defeat Russia, is that genocidal? Does that mean killing all russian citizens?
Speaker B: Professor. Professor Morris, here's another one. When the defense. Ridiculous.
Speaker A: Yes, ridiculous. The american judge, he also doesn't determine policy.
Speaker B: The american judge, the american judge read.
Speaker A: You are holding the american judge to.
Speaker B: You know, she was the president.
Speaker C: Facts of the matter.
Speaker B: The american judge read several of the quotes.
Speaker A: Look at the American Supreme Court today. They may support, Trump chose you.
Speaker B: Professor Morris. Professor Morris, without going too far afield, if you heard a statement by the defense minister, the defense minister said, we are going to prevent any food, water, fuel or electricity from entering.
Speaker A: Did Israel do that?
Speaker B: Okay. No, I'm wondering what he said. I'm asking isn't israeli government, but we're talking about statements now, intent. How would you interpret that, speaker one.
Speaker A: After 1200 of your citizens are murdered the way they were, I would expect extreme statements by lots of politicians, but.
Speaker D: But you're. By lots of politics, but you don't accept extreme policy. But you don't accept what he said.
Speaker A: Is an israeli policy.
Speaker D: You don't.
Speaker A: They let in order, they let in gas.
Speaker D: You don't accept, you don't accept extreme palestinian statements after they lost their entire country, not just 1200 people.
Speaker A: That's a good point. No, no. It's a good point.
Speaker E: And on that, on that moment, brief moment of agreement. Let's just take a quick pause. We need a smoke break, water break, bathroom breakdown.
Speaker B: Gaza is not a genocide.
Speaker C: Russia is a genocide. War with Iraq and we wanted to destroy Iraq. That was a genocidal statement. There's a reason why genocide is so, is such an importantly guarded concept. And it's not to condemn every nation that goes to war.
Speaker A: It made you into an italian all.
Speaker B: The time by your solicitude for international law.
Speaker C: You should try learning it sometime. It would help you sort out a lot of the civilian deaths.
Speaker B: Unfortunately, 15 judges disagree.
Speaker C: You could keep citing the judges. You should actually try reading the actual statements.
Speaker A: This is tiring. You've invited us to a tiring session.
Speaker C: Yeah. There you go.
Speaker E: How you guys doing?
Speaker A: Okay. Okay. There are major things to discuss here, not just what some court is doing and going to judge in two years time.
Speaker C: Yes. Okay. So what you just said is my whole, one of the reasons why I feel so strongly about this particular conflict is because there are really important things to discuss, but they will never be discussed.
Speaker A: They're not doing, we're not going to.
Speaker C: Talk about like Area A, B and C or what, a transference of territory. Instead, we're going to talk about apartheid. We're not going to talk about the differences in how do you conduct war in an urban environment where people. We're just going to talk about genocide. We're not going to talk about what's a good solution. We're just going to say ethnic cleansing.
Speaker E: Possible to be productive over the next 2 hours and talk about solutions.
Speaker A: About solutions. I have no idea what to say. I mean, I don't see any solutions on. If you wanted a positive end to this discussion, which is what you said at the beginning, I can't contribute to that because I'm pessimistic. I don't see anywhere any way forward here.
Speaker C: But the lack of the solution is easy. The reason why the solution is hard is because the histories and the myths are completely, there's a different factual record.
Speaker E: One of the things it'd be good to talk about solutions. The future is going back in all the times it has failed every time.
Speaker C: But even at that, we're probably not going to agree. He's going to say, you could write that. I can predict the whole line. He's going to say from 93 to 99. He's going to say is, didn't adhere to the Oslo Accords ever settlement expansion, continued raids happened into the West bank, that there was never a legitimate. That Netanyahu came in and violated the why memorandum, the transference. He's going to say all of this and he's not going to bring up anything that Palestinians said. And then for Camp David, he's going to say that. Yeah. That Arafat was trying, that the maps and the territorial exchange wasn't good enough, that they were asking Palestinians to make all the concessions that Israel would have made. Yeah.
Speaker E: Well, lay it all up. Lay it up.
Speaker A: You do talk quickly.
Speaker C: Yeah, I know. Yeah.
Speaker A: Anyhow, my future book should interest you guys.
Speaker D: Oh, what are you working on?
Speaker A: No, not working on it. It's actually going to come out. It deals with israeli and arab atrocities, war crimes, I call them, in the 48 war.
Speaker D: Oh, really?
Speaker A: Just deals with that subject.
Speaker D: Is this because I know you've also talked about the closure of the archives and stuff.
Speaker A: Well, it's, it's marginal. They do, it deals with that as well. But they have tried to seal off documents which had already used and seen, so now they don't let people see them. That's happened, but it's marginal in terms of its effect on.
Speaker D: Were the british archives useful for you? For this new book.
Speaker A: Well, for this list, it's mostly israeli archives. The British and the Americans and the UN did deal with these subjects, but not as well as israeli documents.
Speaker D: What's your casualty count for Deir Yaser?
Speaker A: It's about 100. I think there's agreement on that by Israelis and Arabs, 105, because before they were, they used to say 245 or 254. Those were the figures the British and the Arabs and the Haganah agreed on at the beginning because the Red Cross.
Speaker D: I think, was the one that first put out that number.
Speaker A: I don't remember. Maybe it was what's his name? Jacques de Reynier or maybe. Yeah, maybe he came up with that number, but it was just, he didn't count. They didn't count bodies. They just threw the number out. And everybody was happy to blame the Irgun and the lehi for, you know, killing more Arabs than actually.
Speaker D: Well, and they put it to good use as well.
Speaker A: Well, they said that it helped to precipitate more evacuation.
Speaker D: So they were think beginning as memoirs.
Speaker A: They also used that number. Yeah.
Speaker E: So first of all, thank you for that heated discussion about the present. I would love to go back into history in a way that informs what we can look for in a, as a, by way of hope for the future. So when has, in Israel and Palestine have we been closest to something like a peace settlement, to something that, like, where both sides would be happy and enable the flourishing of both peoples?
Speaker A: Well, from my knowledge of the 120 years or so of conflict, the closest I think the two sides have been to reaching some sort of settlement appears to have been in the year 2000, when Barack, and then subsequently Clinton offered a two state settlement to PLO, Palestinian Authority chairman Yasser Arafat. And Arafat seemed to waver. He didnt immediately reject what was being offered, but ultimately came down at the end of Camp David in July 2000. He came down against the proposals. And Clinton, who said he wouldnt blame him, later, blamed Arafat for bringing down the summit and not reaching a solution there. But I think there on the table, certainly in the Clinton parameters of December 2000, which followed the proposals by Barak in July, the Palestinians were offered the best deal they're ever going to get from Israel unless Israel is destroyed, and then they'll just be a palestinian arab state. But the best deal that Israel could ever offer them, they were offered, which essentially was 95% of the West Bank, East Jerusalem, half of the old city of Jerusalem, some sort of joint control of the Temple Mount and the Gaza Strip, of course, in full. And the Palestinians said no to this deal. And nobody really knows why Arafat said no. That is, some people think he was trying to hold out for slightly better terms. But my reading is that he was constitutionally, psychologically incapable of signing off on a two state deal, meaning acceptance of the existence of a jewish state. This was really the problem of Israel.
Speaker D: Or of a jewish state?
Speaker A: Of a jewish state. The jewish state of Israel. He wasn't willing to share Palestine with the Jews and put his name to that. I think he just couldn't do it. That's my reading. But some people say it was because the terms were insufficient and he was willing, but was waiting for slightly better terms. I don't buy that. I don't think so. But other people disagree with me on this.
Speaker E: What do you think?
Speaker D: Well, just briefly, in response, Arafat formally recognized Israel in 1993. Earlier, I don't think, actually that in 2000, 2001, a genuine resolution was on offer because I think the maximum Israel was prepared to offer, admittedly more than it had been prepared to offer in the past, fell short of the minimum that the Palestinians considered to be a reasonable two state settlement. Bearing in mind that as of 1949, Israel controlled 78% of the British Mandate of Palestine, the Palestinians were seeking a state on the remaining 22%. And this was apparently too much for Israel. My response to your question would be, wait, wait.
Speaker A: They were being offered something like 22 or 21%.
Speaker D: They were being offered, I think, less than a withdrawal to the 1967 borders with mutual and minor and reciprocal land swaps. And the just resolution of the refugee.
Speaker A: Problem was one of the questions.
Speaker D: Yes. You know, I worked for a number of years with International Crisis group, and my boss at the time was Rob Malley, who was one of the american officials present in captain thrown out of the State Department.
Speaker A: Whatever.
Speaker D: The point I want to make about Rob was he wrote, I think, a very perceptive article in 2001 in the New York Review Books. I know that you and Ehud Barakdeen have had a debate with them, but I think he gives a very compelling reason of why and how Camp David failed. But rather than going into that, I'll.
Speaker A: You wrote that together with Hussein Ara.
Speaker D: Hussein Ara, yes. Who was not at Camp David. Yes. But in response to your question, I think there could have been a real possibility of israeli palestinian and arab israeli peace in the mid 1970s, in the wake of the 1973 October war. I'll recall that in 1971, Moshe Dayan, Israel's defense minister at the time, full of triumphalism about Israel's victory in 1967, speaking to a group of israeli military veterans stated, if I had to choose between Sharm el Sheikh without peace or peace without Sharmeshech, this is referring to the resort in Egyptian Seiner, which was an under israeli occupation. Dayan said, I will choose for Sharma Sheikh without peace. Then the 1973 war came along and I think israeli calculations began to change very significantly. And I think it was in that context that had there been a joint us soviet push for an arab israeli and israeli palestinian resolution that incorporated both an israeli withdrawal to the 1967 lines and the establishment of a palestinian state in the occupied territories, I think there was a very reasonable prospect for that being achieved. It ended up being aborted, I think, for several reasons. And ultimately the egyptian president, Anwar Sadat, decided, for reasons we can discuss later, to launch a separate unilateral initiative for israeli egyptian rather than arab israeli peace. And I think once that set in motion, the prospects disappeared because Israel essentially saw its most powerful adversary removed from the equation and felt that this would give it a free hand in the occupied territories, also in Lebanon, to get rid of the PLO and so on. So you ask, when were we closest? And I can't give you an answer of when we were closest. I can only tell you when I think we could have been close. And that was a lost opportunity. If we look at the situation today, there's been a lot of discussion about a two state settlement. My own view, and I've written about this, I dont buy the arguments of the naysayers that we have passed the so called point of no return with respect to a two state settlement. Certainly if you look at the israeli position in the occupied territories, I would argue its more tenuous than was the french position in Algeria in 1954, than was a british position in Ireland in 1962, than was the ethiopian position in Eritrea in 1990. And so as a matter of practicality, as a matter of principle, I do think the establishment of a palestinian state in the occupied territories remains realistic. I think the question that we now need to ask ourselves, it's one I'm certainly asking myself since October 7 and looking at Israel's genocidal campaign, but also looking at larger questions, is it desirable? Can you have peace with what increasingly appears to be an irrational, genocidal state that seeks to confront and resolve each and every political challenge with violence and that reacts to its failure to achieve solutions to political challenges with violence by applying even more violence that has an insatiable lust for palestinian territory, that a genocidal apartheid state that seems increasingly incapable of even conceiving of peaceful coexistence with the other people on that land. So I'm very pessimistic that a solution is possible. I look at. I grew up in western Europe in the long shadow of the second world war. I think we can all agree that there could have been no peace in Europe had certain regimes on that continent not been removed from power. I look at Southeast Asia in the late 1970s, and I think we're all agreed that there could not have been peace in that region had the Khmer Rouge not been ousted. I look at southern Africa during the 1990s, and I think we can all be agreed that had the white minority regimes that ruled Zimbabwe and South Africa not been dismantled, there could not have been peace in that region. And although I think it's worth having a discussion, I do think it's now a legitimate question to ask. Can there be peace without dismantling the zionist regime? And I make a very clear distinction between the israeli state and its institutions, on the one hand, and the israeli people, who I think, regardless of our discussion about the history, I think you can now talk about an israeli people and the people that have developed rights over time, and a formula for peaceful coexistence with them will need to be found, which is a separate matter from dismantling the israeli state and its institutions. And again, I haven't reached clear conclusions about this except to say, as a practical matter, I think a two state settlement remains feasible. But I think there are very legitimate questions about its desirability and about whether peace can be achieved in the Middle east with the persistence of an irrational, genocidal apartheid regime, particularly because israeli society is beginning to develop many extremely, extremely distasteful, supremacist, dehumanizing aspects that I think also stand in the way of coexistence that are being fed by this regime.
Speaker E: So if you look back into history when we were closest to peace and do you draw any hope from any of them?
Speaker C: I feel like in 2000, I feel like the deal that was present, at least at the end of the Taba summit, I think in terms of what Israel, I think, had the appetite to give and what the Palestinians would have gotten, would have definitely been the most agreeable between the two parties. I don't know if in 73, I'm not sure if the appetite would have ever been there for the arab states to negotiate alongside the Palestinians. I know that in Jordan there was no love for the Palestinians after 1970, after black September. I know that Sadat had no love for the Palestinians due to their association with the Muslim Brotherhoods, attempted assassinations in Egypt.
Speaker D: Sorry, which Plo and the Muslim Brotherhood.
Speaker C: Sadat was upset because there were attempted assassinations by people in. Oh, no, an assassination. It was a personal friend of his, Yusuf al Sibai. I can't pronounce that. He was assassinated by Cyprus, by a Palestinian.
Speaker D: He was killed by the Abu Nidal organization.
Speaker C: Sure.
Speaker D: Yeah.
Speaker C: Admittedly, yeah. He says as much belongs to his senior group, not PLO directly. But I think that there was a history of the Palestinians sometimes fighting with their neighboring states that were hosting them if they weren't getting the political concessions they wanted. The assassination of the jordanian king in 51 might be another example of that. In Jordan. It feels like over a long period of time, it feels like the Palestinians have been kind of told from the neighboring arab states that if they just continue to enact violence, whether in Israel or abroad, that eventually a state will materialize. Somehow I don't think it's gotten them any closer to a state. If anything, I think it's taken them farther and farther and farther away from one. And I think as long as the hyperbolic language is continually employed internationally, the idea that Israel is committing a genocide, the idea that there is an apartheid, the idea that they live in a concentration camp, all of these words. I think further the narrative for the Palestinians that Israel is an evil state that needs to be dismantled. I mean, you said as much about the institution, at least to the zionist government. Israel's government is probably not going anywhere. All of the other surrounding arab states have accepted that, or at least most of them down in the Gulf, Egypt and Jordan have accepted that. The Palestinians need to accept it, too. The israeli state, where the state apparatus is not going anywhere. And at some point they need to realize, like, hey, we need a leader that's going to come out and represent us, represent all of us, is willing to take political risks, is willing to negotiate some lasting peace for us. And it's not going to be the international community or some invocation of international law or some invocation of morality or justice that's going to extricate us from this conflict. It's going to take some actual difficult political maneuvering on the ground of accepting Israel. Of accepting Israel.
Speaker D: Which they formally did in 1993.
Speaker C: Which they formally did in 1993. Yeah, but then no lasting peace came after that in 2000.
Speaker D: No, because 1993 was not a peace agreement.
Speaker C: Sure, the Oslo Accords weren't a final.
Speaker D: Solution, were an interim agreement, and Palestinians actually began clamoring for commencing the permanent status resolutions on schedule. And the Israelis kept delaying them. In fact, they only began, I believe in 99 under american pressure on the Israelis.
Speaker A: I think you're being a bit one sided. Both sides didn't fulfill the promise of Oslo and the steps needed for Oslo. There was palestinian terrorism, which accompanied Israel's expansion of settlements and other things. The two things fed each other and led to what happened in 2000, which was a breakdown of the talks altogether when the Palestinians said no. But I think there's a. I don't agree, incidentally, with this definition of Israel or the israeli state as apartheid. It's not. There is some sort of apartheid going on in the West bank. The israeli regime itself is not an apartheid regime. That is nonsense by any definition of apartheid, which.
Speaker D: Well, by the formal definition, I think it qualifies.
Speaker A: No, it doesn't qualify. Apartheid is a race based distinction between different segments of the population. And some of them don't have any representation at all, like the blacks in South Africa, no rights at all in Israel itself, the minority, the Arabs do have representation, do have rights and so on. I don't think Israel is also genocidal. I don't think it's been genocidal. It wasn't so in 48, it wasn't so in 67. And it hasn't been recently, in my view. And talk about dismantling Israel and that's what you're talking about is, I think Stephen said it correctly, is counterproductive. It just pushes Israelis further away from willing to give Palestinians anything.
Speaker E: Please, Norm, tell me you have something optimistic. Optimistic to say.
Speaker B: Even though I agree. I've thought about it a lot and I agree with Moines analysis. I'm not really in the business of punditry. I rather look at the historical record where I feel more comfortable and I feel on terra firma. So I'd like to just go through that. I don't quite. I agree. And I disagree with Moin on the 73 issue. After the 1973 war, it was clear that Israel was surprised by what happened during the war and it took a big hit. The estimates are. I don't know what numbers you use, but I hear between two and 3000 israeli soldiers were killed during the 19 hundreds.
Speaker D: It was 2527 hundred.
Speaker B: Yeah. Okay, so I got it right here. I read different numbers. That's, you know, it's a very large number of Israelis who were killed. There were moments at the beginning of the war where there was a fear that this might be it.
Speaker A: No, there wasn't. There wasn't.
Speaker B: No.
Speaker A: This is not everybody forgets Israel's atomic weaponry.
Speaker B: I know, but.
Speaker A: So how could they have been?
Speaker D: Didn't Diane talk about the collapse of the third temple?
Speaker A: He did, but it was hysterical and silly. Israel had atomic weapons. They wanted to stop Syrians or the Egyptians.
Speaker D: But we're talking about perceptions.
Speaker B: I can't tell you if he was hysterical or not.
Speaker A: No, he wasn't in the same room with him for a day. He was.
Speaker B: But I'm just saying let's not bog down on that. The war is over and when President Carter comes into power. Carter was an extremely smart guy, Jimmy Carter, extremely smart guy. And he was very fixed on details, extreme. He, he was probably the most impressive of modern american presidents, in my opinion, by a wide margin. And he was determined to resolve the conflict on a big scale, on the arab israeli scale. On the palestinian issue, he wouldn't go past what he called a palestinian homeland. He wouldn't.
Speaker D: Palestinian national home.
Speaker B: The palestinian national home. He wouldn't go as far as a palestinian state. I'm not going to go into the details of that. I don't think realistically, given the political balance of forces that was going to happen. But that's a separate issue. Let's get to the issue at hand, namely, what is the obstacle or what has been the obstacle since the early 1970s. Since roughly 1974, the Palestinians have accepted the two state settlement and the June 1967 border. Now, as it got, as more pressure was exerted on Israel because the Palestinians seemed reasonable, the Israelis, to quote the israeli political scientist Avner Yaniv, he since passed from the scene. He said, Yaniv, in his book, Dilemmas of security, he said that the big palestinian, big israeli fear was what he called the palestinian peace offensive. That was their worry, that the Palestinians were becoming to moderate. And unless you understand that, you can't understand the June 1982 Lebanon war. The purpose of the June 1982 Lebanon war was to liquidate the PLO in southern Lebanon because they were too moderate. The palestinian peace offensive. I'm going to have to fast forward. There are many events. There's the first Intifada, then there's the Oslo accord. And let's now go to the heart of the issue, namely the 2000 2001 negotiations. Well, the negotiations are divided into three parts for the sake of listeners. There's Camp David in July 2000. There are the Clinton parameters in December 2000. And, and then there are negotiations in Taba in Egypt, Taba in Egypt in 2001. Those are the three phases. Now I have studied the record probably to the point of insanity, because there are so many details you have to master.
Speaker A: I'll vouch for that.
Speaker B: The insanity part, actually, I will vouch for it. I will personally vouch for it. There is one extensive record from that whole period, from 2000 to, you could say, 2007, and that is what came to be called the Palestine papers, which are about 15,000 pages of all the records of the negotiations. I have read through all of them, every single page. And this is what I find. If you look at Shlomo Ben Amis book, which I have with me prophets without honor. It's his last book. He says, going into Camp David, that means July. Going into Camp David, July 2000. He said the Israelis were willing to return about not return, but will withdraw from 90, relinquished 92% of the West Bank.
Speaker D: Ben Amy was at Cam David.
Speaker B: Yeah, he was at Taba. Oh, yeah. He was also captivated. They wanted, Israel wanted to keep all the major settlement blocks. It wanted to keep roughly 8% of the West bank. They were allowing for. You put it at 84% to 90% in your books. They put it at roughly 92%. Israel was willing to give up.
Speaker D: How you calculate what stage Camp David.
Speaker A: Because there were two weeks.
Speaker B: I'll get to that.
Speaker A: Proposals change during the war.
Speaker B: So Israel wants to keep all the major settlement blocks.
Speaker A: Means the border area of the west.
Speaker B: Well, not the border. We have Ariel, we have male Adumim, we have, as Condoleezza Rice called Ariel. She said it was a dagger into the heart of the west bank. So they want to keep 8% of the land. They want to keep the settlement blocks. They want to keep 80% of the settlers. They will not budge an inch of on the question of refugees, to quote Ehud Barak in the article he co authored with you in the New York Review of Books, we will accept, and I think the quote is accurate, no moral, legal, or historical responsibility for what happened to the refugees. So forget about even allowing refugees to return. We accept no moral, legal or historical responsibility for the refugees. And on Jerusalem, they wanted to keep large parts of Jerusalem. Now, how do we judge who is reasonable and who is not? Ben Ami says, I think the israeli offer was reasonable. That's how he sees it. But what is the standard of reasonable? My standard is, what does international law say? International law says the settlements are illegal. Israel wants to keep all the settlement blocks. 15 judges. All 15. In the war decision in 2004, in July 2004, all 15 judges, including the american judge Bergen Thal, ruled the settlements are illegal. Under international law, they want to keep 80% of the settlers. Under international law, all the settlers are illegal in the West bank. They want to keep large parts of East Jerusalem. But under international law, East Jerusalem is occupied palestinian territory. That's what the international. Okay.
Speaker A: There's never been a palestinian state. How could it be palestinian?
Speaker B: I listen patiently to you.
Speaker A: Sorry.
Speaker B: Under international law, if you read the decision, all territory. They're not. 2004 wall decision, all territory beyond the Green Line, which includes East Jerusalem, is occupied palestinian territory. The designated unit, according to the International Court of Justice, the designated unit for palestinian self determination. And they deny any right whatsoever on the right of return. The maximum, I don't want to go into the details now. The maximum formal offer was by Ehud Omar in 2008. He offered 5000 refugees could return under what was called family reunification. 5000 in the course of five years and no recognition of any israeli responsibility. So if you use as the baseline what the UN general assembly has said and what the International Court of Justice has said, if you use that baseline, international law, by that baseline, all the concessions came from the palestinian side. Every single concession came from the palestinian side. None came from the israeli side. They may have accepted less than what they wanted, but it was still beyond what international law allocated to them.
Speaker D: Now you say allocated to the Palestinians?
Speaker B: Allocated to Palestinians, yes. Thank you for the clarification. Now about Arafat. Like the mufti never liked the guy. I think that was one of the only disagreements Moween and I had when Arafat passed. You were a little sentimental. I was not. Never liked the guy. But politics, you don't have to like the guy. There was no question, nobody argues it, that whenever the negotiations started up, the Palestinians just kept saying the same things.
Speaker A: No.
Speaker B: They kept saying, no, no, Professor Morris, with due respect, incorrect. They kept saying, international legitimacy, international law, UN resolutions. They said, we already gave you what the law required. We gave that in 1988, November 1988, and then ratified again at Oslo in 1993. And they said, now we want what was promised us under international law. And that was the one point where everybody on the other side agreed. Clinton, don't talk to me about international law, Livny. During the Omar administration, she said, I studied international law. I don't believe in international law. Every single member on the other side, they didn't want to hear from international law. And to my thinking that that is the only reasonable baseline for trying to resolve the conflict. And Israel has, along with when has.
Speaker A: International law been relevant to any conflict in the world over the last hundred years?
Speaker B: That's why the Palestinians have to recognize Israel, because that's international law.
Speaker A: That was UN resolution 242. International law, or in accordance with international law.
Speaker B: Professor Morris, for argument's sake, let's agree on that. Strictly for argument's sake, what's the alternative? Dennis Ross said, we're going to decide who gets what on the basis of needs. So he says Israel needs this, Israel needs that. Israel needs that. Dennis Ross decided to be the philosopher king. He's going to decide on the basis of needs. Well, if you asked me, since Gaza is one of the densest places on earth, it needs.
Speaker A: Needs part of Sinai. That's what it actually needs.
Speaker B: Okay? I don't even want to go there. It needs a nice big chunk, but I have to accept. International law says no, okay, international law is irrelevant. Now, Bellamy says, I think the israeli offer was reasonable. Okay, that's.
Speaker A: And he's a reasonable guy.
Speaker B: That's here. He seems, even though, okay, I don't want to go there. I've debated him and partly agree with you, but who decides what's reasonable? I think the international community in its political incarnation, the general assembly, the Security Council, all those UN Security Council resolutions saying the settlements are illegal, annexation of east Jerusalem is null and void, and the International Court of Justice, that to me is a reasonable standard. And by that standard the Palestinians were asked to make concessions which I consider unreasonable or the international community considers unreasonable.
Speaker C: I think that the issue is when you apply international law or international standards, I wouldn't say what Benny Moore says, that they're irrelevant, but I think that these have to be seen as informing the conversation. I don't think these are the final shape of the conversation. I don't think historically Israel has ever negotiated within the strict bounds whether we're talking resolution 242, whether we're talking about any general assembly resolutions. That's just not how these negotiations tend to go. You might consider international opinion on things, but at the end of the day, it's the bilateral negotiations oftentimes historically started in secret, independent of the international community, that end up shaping what the final agreements look like. I think the issue with this broad appeal to international law is, again, going back to my earlier point about all of the euphemistic words. All it simply does is drive palestinian expectations up to a level that is never going to be satisfied. For instance, you can throw that ICJ opinion all you want. It was an advisory opinion that came in 2004. Have Palestinians gained more or less land since that 2004 advisory opinion was issued?
Speaker D: So what would your standard be then?
Speaker C: Both sides have to have a delegation that confronts each other and they assess the realistic conditions on the ground and they try to figure out, within the contrast, fines of international law are reasonable for. But like, for instance, this statement of like full retreat from the West bank. What is it, 400,000 settlers. How many settlers live in the West bank now?
Speaker A: Probably half a million.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: You're going to depend if you include.
Speaker C: The Jerusalem suburbs, four or 500,000 people.
Speaker A: Are never with the Jerusalem suburbs. Perhaps, yeah.
Speaker C: Half a million people.
Speaker A: Jerusalem, not settlements.
Speaker B: I know that, but that's not what the law, the law calls it null and void.
Speaker D: Let me.
Speaker C: We can say. We can say whatever we want until we're blue in the face, but, like, there's half a million israeli people are not being expelled from waste.
Speaker D: My response, you're basically saying, if I understand correctly, there's only one way to resolve this and that is through direct bilateral negotiations.
Speaker C: Probably, yeah.
Speaker D: Okay, so. Or ideally, but I've taken over your house. Okay. You're not going to go to the police because you know the law is of only of limited value. So you come over and sit in what is now my living room. That used to be your living room, and we negotiate. The problem there is that you're not going to get anything unless I agree to it and standards and norms and law and all the rest of it be damned. So you need to take into account that when you're advocating bilateral negotiations that effectively, that gives each of the parties veto power. And in the current circumstances, the Palestinians have already recognized Israel. They have.
Speaker C: You keep bringing that up like it's a significant concession.
Speaker A: It's not even true.
Speaker C: The recognition from Palestine isn't doing anything for Hamas.
Speaker A: Totally rejected.
Speaker D: I'm not talking about Hamas is the.
Speaker A: Majority among the palestinian people. They won the elections in 2006. Every major.
Speaker D: Actually, they won a majority of the seats.
Speaker A: Yes, exactly.
Speaker D: They didn't win a majority of the votes.
Speaker A: Every opinion poll today says the majority of Palestinians support the Hamas.
Speaker D: That sounds.
Speaker A: The Hamas absolutely rejects Israel. So if Arafat, 1993 or whatever, issued a sort of recognition.
Speaker D: It wasn't a sort of recognition, okay.
Speaker A: A recognition of Israel. It doesn't. It's meaningless. It's meaningless.
Speaker D: It's meaningless.
Speaker A: Anyhow. I don't believe that Arafat was sincere about it.
Speaker D: Does it matter what you or I think?
Speaker A: Well, most Israelis do, and that does matter.
Speaker D: Okay, so matter.
Speaker A: But Hamas says no and Hamas is the majority.
Speaker D: So for years. So for years, the Israeli and us demand was that the Palestinians recognize 242338. They did. But you're saying, okay, we demanded that they do this, but it was meaningless when they did it. Then the demand was that tactical thing.
Speaker A: Yes.
Speaker D: Then the demand was the PLO recognize Israel tactical. Okay. We demanded that they did this. And they did it, but it's meaningless.
Speaker A: And they never changed their charter, the PLO, you may remember that. In fact, they supposedly abrogated the old charter but never came up with a new one.
Speaker D: No. So no new charter in 1996.
Speaker A: And Farooq Kadumi said, of course, the whole charter is still in force.
Speaker D: Yes, but the point is, the Palestinians demands are constantly made of them. And when they exceed to those demands, they're then told, actually, what you did is meaningless. So here's a new set of demands. I mean, you know, it's like a hamster.
Speaker A: There's no new set of demands.
Speaker D: It's like a hamster. It's like a hamster.
Speaker A: Let me tell you what.
Speaker C: No, no.
Speaker A: Let me tell you what that will be told.
Speaker D: If you run fast enough, you'll get out of the cave.
Speaker A: No, no. The bottom line is that Israel would like a palestinian, sadat. It wants the Palestinians. Listen, listen.
Speaker D: It's really a worst case scenario, okay, let me just.
Speaker A: Because the shots are that. But anyhow, the Israelis want, for good reason, want the Palestinians. Israelis want the Palestinians to actually accept the legitimacy of the state of Israel and design this project and then live side by side with them in two states. That's what the Israelis. I don't even know if this is true today.
Speaker D: And what is the formal position of this israeli government?
Speaker A: No, no. I'm saying I don't know if it exists.
Speaker D: Okay, it's pre, it's predecessor. And it's predecessor. And its predecessor. Come on.
Speaker A: That's what Israelis want. Change of psyche among the Palestinians. If that doesn't happen, there won't be a Palestinian.
Speaker B: Moine has an interesting point. Because I found. I found, I know you want to. I know you want to forget it. Just like you want to forget the genocide charge. I know you want to forget that.
Speaker C: Well, the Palestinians want to forget it too. And it doesn't suit them as well.
Speaker B: But here's the problem. And it's exactly the problem that Moine just brought up. Now, I read carefully your book, one state, two states. With all due respect, absolutely a disgrace. Coming. Coming from you, coming from you.
Speaker A: Most reviewers didn't agree with you.
Speaker B: Yeah, coming from you was like you wrote it in your sleep. It's nothing compared to what you wrote before. I don't know why you did it. In my opinion, you ruined your reputation. Not totally, but you undermined it with that book. But let's get to the issue that Moween wrote. Here's what you said. You said formally, you said, yes, it's true. The Palestinians recognize Israel. But then you said, viscerally, in their hearts, they don't. They didn't really recognize Israel. So I thought to myself, how does Professor Morrison chest. No. What's in the hearts of Palestinians? I don't know. I was explained. I was surprised, as a historian. Historian. You would be talking about what's lurking in the hearts of Palestinians. But then you said something which was really interesting. You said, even if in their hearts, they accepted Israel, you said, quote, rationally, they could never accept Israel because they got nothing. They had this beautiful Palestine, and now they're reduced to just a few pieces, a few parcels of land.
Speaker A: So they will never accept it.
Speaker B: So, yes. So you said there's no way they can accept it.
Speaker A: No, I would say that as well.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: The two states of proposal doesn't make any sense.
Speaker B: Exactly. As Moine said. You keep moving the goalposts.
Speaker A: No, no.
Speaker B: Until we reach the point where we realize, according to Benny Morris, there can't be a solution. So why don't you just say that outright? Why don't you say it outright? They're according to you, the Palestinians can never be reasonable because according to you.
Speaker A: They want all of Palestine.
Speaker B: You're according to you, they couldn't possibly. They couldn't possibly agree to a two state summit because it's such a lousy settlement. Because they want you all to Palestine because you. But you said rationally, they couldn't accept it. Not their feelings.
Speaker A: It's both.
Speaker B: You said rational. You went from formally, viscerally. Rationally. So now we're reaching the point where, according to Benny Morris, the Palestinians can't be reasonable because reasonably, they have to reject two states.
Speaker A: They want all of Palestine.
Speaker B: That's absolutely correct. There's no way to resolve the problem, according to your logic.
Speaker A: Well, Palestine. He said that himself. He said they should dismantle Israel. That's what he's saying.
Speaker D: What I said, what I said. And I've written.
Speaker B: I'm glad you didn't deny it.
Speaker D: I've written extensively on this issue, on why a two state settlement is still feasible, and I came out in support of that proposition. Perhaps in my heart, you know, you can see that I was just bullshitting, but that's what I actually wrote. That was a number of years ago, and just as a matter of historical record, beginning in the early 1970s, there was fierce debate within the palestinian national movement about whether to accept or reject. And there were three schools of thought. There was one that would accept nothing less than the total liberation of Palestine. There was a second that accepted what was called the establishment of a fighting national Authority on palestinian soil, which they saw as the beginning as a springboard for the total liberation of Palestine. And there was a third school that believed that under current dynamics and so on, that they should go for a two state settlement. And our friend and correspondent Kauter Loewerse has written a very perceptive article on when the PLO, ready in 1976, came out in open support of a two state resolution at the Security Council, PLO accepted it. Israel, of course, rejected it, but the resolution didn't pass because the US and the UK vetoed it. It was both of them.
Speaker B: I think it was nine to five.
Speaker D: Ah, okay. Yeah. But fact of the matter is that the PLO came to accept a two state settlement. Why they did it, I think is irrelevant. And subsequently the PLO acted on the basis of seeking to achieve a two state settlement. The reason I think, and I think Norm, you've written about this, the reason that Arafat was so insistent on getting minimally acceptable terms for a two state settlement at Camp David and afterwards was precisely because he knew that once he signed, that was all the Palestinians were going to get. If his intention had been, I'm not accepting Israel, I simply want to springboard, he would have accepted a palestinian state in Jericho, but he didn't.
Speaker A: That's something I've never understood. He should have logically accepted the springboard and then from there launched his next state. He should have done that.
Speaker B: International law would put a real constraint on him.
Speaker A: No, but once he accepted it was over, constitutionally, he was incapable of signing. He should have accepted it.
Speaker D: But if you're correct, okay, that he was really out to eliminate Israel, then he wouldn't have cared about the borders, he wouldn't have cared about what the thing said about refugees. He would have gotten a sovereign state and used that to achieve that purpose. But I think it was precisely because he recognized that he was not negotiating for a springboard, he was negotiating permanent status, that he was such a stickler about the details.
Speaker B: The second, just as a factual matter, he wasn't such a stickler. When they asked him how many refugees, the numbers.
Speaker D: It was a principle rather than the principal.
Speaker A: The principle, he said, I would be pragmatic about it.
Speaker B: And the numbers that were used at Annapolis were between 100 and 250,000 refugees over ten years. That was the number Arafat, when he was asked at Camp David, he kept saying, I care about the Lebanese, the palestinian refugees in Lebanon, which came to about 300 priority, which was a large concession from whether you accept the number or not, that he wasn't talking about 6 million, he was talking about between 100 and 250,000 over ten years. Now, the best offer that came from the Palestinians, excuse me, the best offer that came from Israel was the Omar offer.
Speaker E: Can we just pretend like we didn't all lay out the exceptionally pessimistic view of a two state, hold on a second to stay solution. Let's pretend that in five years, in ten years, a two state peace settlement is reached, and as historians, you'll still be here and writing about it 20 years from now. How would it have happened?
Speaker C: I think that historically, I think that the big issue is, I think that both sides have had their own internal motivations to fight because they feel like they have something to gain from it. But I think as time has gone on, unfortunately, the record proves that the palestinian side is delusional. The longer that the conflict endures, the worse position they'll be in. But for some reason, they've never had a leader that convinced them of that as much that Arafat thought that if he held on, there was always a better deal around the corner. Abbas is more concerned with trying to maintain any legitimacy amongst Palestinians than actually trying to negotiate anything realistic with Israel. That Palestinians are always incentivized to feel like as long as they keep fighting, either the international community is going to save them with the 5,000,000th UN resolution condemning whatever, that another ICJ advisory opinion is finally going to lead to the expulsion of half a million Jews from the West bank, or that some other international body, the ICJ and the genocide charge, is going to come and save the Palestinians, as long as they in their mind, feel like somebody is coming to save them, then they feel like they're going to have the ability to get something better in the future. But the reality is, is all of the good partners for peace that the Palestinians had have completely and utterly abandoned them. Egypt, Jordan, the Gulf states, whether you're talking bilateral peace or the Abraham accords, most of the arab leaders in negotiating peace with Israel have just not had as much of an interest in maintaining the rights and the representations of what the palestinian people want. And the only people they have today to draw legitimacy from Orlando, to have on their side to argue with them, are people that, I guess, write books or tweet or people in the international community that do resolutions or Amnesty international reports. And the reality is we can scream until we're blue in the face on these things. None of it has gotten any closer to helping the Palestinians in any sense of the word. The condition has only gotten worse. The settlements only continue to expand. The military operations are only to get more brutal. The blockade is going to continue to have worse effects as long as we use international law as the basis. And there isn't a strong, a sadat like palestinian leader that's willing to come up and confront Israel with the brave, peaceful negotiations to force them to acquiesce, nothing is going to happen. And I think that the issue you come up with is whether it's people like norm that talk about how brave the October 7 attacks were or how much respect they have for those fighters, Israel, in a way, and I think people have said as much about Netanyahu, the right wants violence from the Palestinians because it always gives them a perpetual excuse to further the conflict. Well, we have to go in and, and October 7, we've got a room of Hamas. Well, we can't trust these people in the west. We have to do the night raids because the second intifada made us feel like the palestinian people didn't want trust with us. I feel like the biggest thing that would force Israel to change its path would be an actual, a real, not for like two weeks, but an actual peaceful palestinian leader, somebody committed to peace that is able to apply those standards and hold the entire region of Palestine to those standards. Because I think over time, the mounting pressure from, without the international community and the mounting pressure from within, because Israel hosts a lot of its own criticism. If we talk about Bet Salem, Doggone, Israel will host a lot of its own criticism. I think that that pressure would force Israel towards an actual peace agreement, but it's never going to come through violence. Historically, it hasn't. And in the modern day, violence has just hurt the Palestinians more and more.
Speaker E: If you paint a picture of the future, now is a good moment for both Palestine and Israel to get new leadership. Netanyahu's on the way out. Hamas possibly is on the way out. Who should rise to the top such that a peaceful settlement can be reached?
Speaker C: The problem is, like Benny said, yeah, it's difficult because Hamas enjoys so much widespread support amongst the palestinian people. I think that the. Well, I don't know. There's opinions on whether democracy or pushing them towards elections was the right or wrong idea. But with, like an islamic fundamentalist government for Hamas, I don't know if a negotiation with Israel ever happens there. And then when the international pressure is always 67 borders, infinite right of return for refugees, and a total withdrawal of Israel from all these lands to even start negotiations. I just don't see realistically on the palestinian side. No negotiations are ever going to start in a place that Israel is willing to accept.
Speaker D: If you want to dismiss international law, that's fine, but then you have to do it consistently. You can't set standards for the Palestinians, but reject applying those standards to Israel. If we're going to have the law of the jungle, then we can all be beasts. And not only some of us. And I think so it's either that or you have certain agreed standards that, that are intended to regulate our conduct, all of our conduct, not just some of us.
Speaker C: So that's what I'm saying. To abandon.
Speaker D: Well, you're saying, you know international law and the millionth UN resolution. You're being very dismissive about all this.
Speaker C: Well, I'm saying, and that's fine, but.
Speaker D: Then you have to be dismissive.
Speaker C: Like for instance, across the board. That was a chapter six resolution. That's non binding. But two four two binding. Absolutely not.
Speaker B: What is, what is binding? Do you know anything about how the UN system works?
Speaker C: If you read the language of the resolution, binding is typically commits you to upholding a particular international law or for.
Speaker B: The statistics, you just throw out words you hear.
Speaker C: Binding this 242 even does two four two mention a palestinian state norm?
Speaker D: Of course, that's part of the problem.
Speaker B: That was the reason why the Palestinians didn't want to recognize 242, because they only referred at the very end 181.
Speaker C: And 242 when they were.
Speaker D: Yeah, but hold on, hold on. Every United Nations Security Council resolution, irrespective of, under which chapter it was adopted, is by definition binding. Binding not only on the members of the Security Council, but on every member state of the UN. That's read the UN charter. It's black and white people.
Speaker C: Look, now, regarding the language, even of 242 is kept intentionally vague such that it doesn't actually provide. Again, the final context is not that.
Speaker D: Vague because the term land for peace originates. And 242, the idea is territorial acquisition.
Speaker C: And Israel's need to give it up was kept vague. That's why in 79, Israel saw that they fulfilled their obligations under 242.
Speaker B: Allow me points of information. The first principle in UN resolution 242 is the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, which is meaningless. It may be meaningless to you, mister. Meaningless to everyone, Mister Bono. That principle was adopted by the friendly nations resolution, the UN General assembly, in 1970. That resolution was then reiterated in the International Court of Justice ruling advisory opinion in 2004. That was the basis of the coalition against Iraq when it acquired Kuwait, and then declared it a province of Kuwait, whichever. That's what's called. That's what's true. I'm not going to go there. I'm not going to go there.
Speaker C: It's not accurate that Arafat endorsed.
Speaker B: Okay. I'm not going to go there.
Speaker C: Okay.
Speaker B: International law. Use kogans or peremptory norms of international law. The inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war. That is not controversial. It's not vague. You couldn't put it more succinctly. You cannot acquire territory by force under international law.
Speaker C: On the West bank before 67. Who.
Speaker B: Mister Bennell, don't change the subject if you don't know what you're talking about.
Speaker C: At least.
Speaker B: At least have the humility you talk about.
Speaker C: How close is 242 got? How close has 242 gotten to the.
Speaker B: Palestinians to peace from tweet five? You have no idea what you're talking about. It's just so embarrassing. At least have some humility between us who have read maybe 10,000 books on the topic and you've read two Wikipedia entries and you start talking about chapter six. Do you know what chapter seven is? You know what chapter.
Speaker C: Answer the question. How close is 242 gotten the Palestinians to a state? How close is the 2004 advisory opinion gotten the West bank settlement?
Speaker D: What's your alternative?
Speaker C: The alternative is not this, whatever this making money off the conflict is the actual alternative. The actual alternative.
Speaker B: You go and talk.
Speaker C: To 50 million different people. The issue is you have all these.
Speaker A: Resolutions have gotten the Palestinians.
Speaker D: No, the state, because they have here.
Speaker B: Earlier because of the US veto.
Speaker A: They're not going to be enforced.
Speaker D: Wait, wait, wait.
Speaker B: Okay, if I may. You know what, Professor Morris? For genocide, Professor Morris, because of your logic, and I'm not disputing it. That's why October 7 happened.
Speaker C: Oh, my God.
Speaker B: Because there was no options left for those people. Exactly. What now?
Speaker A: Options are left after.
Speaker B: This is now an expert on palestinian mentality.
Speaker D: You're contradicting yourself.
Speaker C: Necessary to negotiate. Jordan didn't find it necessary. Negotiate. Piece of the Palestinians.
Speaker E: Everybody.
Speaker D: Wait. You're contradicting yourself. On the one hand, you're saying all the Palestinians do is fight and violence and terrorism and all the rest of it. But on the other hand, you're saying they're expecting salvation from UN resolutions and international court. Those aren't violent.
Speaker C: No, but it's part of maintaining, it's the continual putting off of negotiating any solution they've negotiated. As in when Arafat respond.
Speaker B: All over the world?
Speaker C: Yes. I'm putting the conflict off two states.
Speaker B: In 1975 braces.
Speaker A: Accept the two state solutions.
Speaker C: You can quote Arafat talking about how he's lying and he's just going to use in 94 and a 95 when he making trips around the world. There's a very rich starting ground. I'm sorry, I can. You can watch tv and slow down to 0.5 speed if you don't understand what I'm saying.
Speaker D: Let me. There's a very, there's a very lengthy history of israeli palestinian negotiations. You want to deny that those negotiations.
Speaker C: Took place where it feels like there was a good faith effort? Where there was a good faith effort? Where was a good faith effort in record, Mister Pop historical. You can't even read the written records. I don't know why you're referring to it.
Speaker B: Excuse me? I just said there are 15,000 pages.
Speaker C: On Annapolis and I'm sure you cherry quaked your favorite quote from all. Okay, that's great. That's great.
Speaker B: At least I had a quote to cherry pick all you have and I.
Speaker C: Ricky P. One I gave you.
Speaker B: All you have is Wikipedia quotes.
Speaker C: Find me the information. The palestinian cause has been furthered by any international law. Can't do it. Speaker one.
Speaker D: I think the problem is, is different. Okay? You want to say the Palestinians were only fighting, and then when I point out they've also gone to the court and the UN say, well, all they do then is these things and they should be negotiating. And I demonstrate that there was a lengthy record of negotiations that, yeah, but they didn't go in good faith. Again, you're placing the hamster in the wheel and telling him if he runs fast enough, maybe one day he'll get out of the cage.
Speaker C: What was the best.
Speaker D: Okay, please, if I could just finish. I think the fundamental problem here is not what the Palestinians have and haven't done. And it's perfectly legitimate to have a discussion about whether they could have been more effective. Of course they could have been more effective. Everyone could have always been more effective. The fundamental issue here is that Israel has never been prepared to concede the legitimacy palestinian national rights in the land of the former british mandate of Palestine.
Speaker C: How do you explain Taba summit? How do you explain the cap?
Speaker A: David Olmert did. How do you explain of palestinian demands? This is. They just didn't want to give the Palestinians all of Palestine. That's all.
Speaker B: No, all of Palestine.
Speaker D: You mean all of the occupied territories?
Speaker A: You're talking about all of Palestine.
Speaker C: Wait, what is the occupied. What is the occupied territory?
Speaker D: The occupied territory.
Speaker C: All of Israel.
Speaker D: The occupied territories are those territories that Israel occupied in June of 1966.
Speaker A: Palestinians often use that term to define the whole of Palestine. Could you show me, not just the West bank, could you show me, Professor.
Speaker B: Morris, in all the negotiations, all the negotiations and all the accounts that have been written, can you show me one where the Palestinians end the negotiations? Because that's what we were talking about. Wanted all of Israel the maximum.
Speaker A: I can't say that because international community won't accept.
Speaker D: So they didn't say it? They didn't ask?
Speaker A: No, Hamas did. Hamas always said, Hamas, never.
Speaker D: Hamas only negotiated with Israel about prisoner exchanges.
Speaker A: A lot of the palestinian people, you.
Speaker B: Will agree, the only place I saw pieces of Israel were the land swaps. And the land swaps accounted for about two to 5% of Israel. Nobody asked for all of Israel.
Speaker C: Wait, what do you mean? They asked for all of Israel in 48? They asked for all of Israel in 67. What do you think those wars were about? You're not going to respond to anything I'm saying because you have no answer.
Speaker B: I respond to you.
Speaker C: That's correct.
Speaker B: Okay, Mister Bonnell, we were talking about the diplomatic negotiations beginning with 2000, 2001.
Speaker C: The first task for Israel was in diplomacy, okay? It was through war.
Speaker B: You don't know what you're talking about.
Speaker C: Is the international law argument ever going to get the Palestinians closer to state? Is the israeli state ever going to be dismantled? Do you think that's like, realistic coming up ever in the next 20 years?
Speaker D: Again, I'm posing a question, and the question is, regardless of what's feasible or realistic today, the question I'm posing is, can you have peace in the Middle east with this militant, irrational, genocidal apartheid state and power?
Speaker C: I don't think so, no.
Speaker D: Okay. And the question I'm asking is, can you have peace with this regime, or does this regime and its institutions need to be dismantled similar to what the examples I gave of Europe and southern Africa?
Speaker C: How do you contend with the fact that most of the surrounding arab states seem to agree that you can?
Speaker D: Yeah, you're correct. Several of them, most importantly Egypt, Jordan, have made their peace with Israel. I should add that Israel's conduct since then has placed these relations under strain. I had very little. I didn't take the reports of a Saudi israeli rapprochement particularly seriously before October 7. The reason being that it was really a Saudi israeli US deal which committed the US to make certain commitments to Saudi Arabia that would probably never get through Congress.
Speaker C: Do you not consider the Egypt israeli peace deal legitimate then, since the United States made a great financial contribution to Egypt.
Speaker D: I don't think the question is whether that deal is legitimate or not. I think that deal exists. But the point is whether the core of this conflict is not between Israel and Egypt. The core of this conflict is between Israel and the palestinian people. And the reason that Israel agreed to relinquish the occupied Egyptian Sinai and the reason that egyptian israeli peace treaty was signed in 1979 is because Israel in 1973 recognized that its military superiority was ultimately no match for Egypt's determination to recover its occupied territories and that there would come a point when Egypt would find a way to extract an unbearable price.
Speaker A: Maybe not just the Israelis wanted peace.
Speaker D: Well, the Israelis.
Speaker A: Not just because they were afraid of what Egypt might do.
Speaker D: If you're talking about the averages, citizen, I think that's a fair characterization. If you're talking about the israeli leadership, I think they looked at it in more strategic terms. How do you remove the most powerful arab military?
Speaker C: Two points.
Speaker B: Simple points. What was the terms of that? Egypt Israel peace treaty? International law. Egypt demanded every.
Speaker A: Nobody cared about international law.
Speaker B: Allow me to finish. Every single inch.
Speaker A: Nobody talks about international law. Professor and Sadat talked about the reality.
Speaker B: No, professor.
Speaker A: Territory.
Speaker B: Professor Morris. Professor Morris, I know the record. They demanded, as you know, because you've written about it. They demanded every square inch, as you know. They demanded the oil fields dismantled. That's in airfield.
Speaker A: No, not dismantled.
Speaker B: They want the door and wanted the settlements dismantled.
Speaker A: That was dismantled.
Speaker B: The settlements. The oil fields in the airfield. They demanded all three back. You can't have back.
Speaker A: The airfields weren't there.
Speaker B: That's incorrect.
Speaker C: What's.
Speaker B: You're incorrect. They build an airfield. The Israelis build an airfield in the occupied Sinai and they wanted it back.
Speaker A: It back wasn't there.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: They wanted the territory in which they built back.
Speaker B: The oil fields, the airfields. The settlements had to be dismantled.
Speaker A: Yes.
Speaker B: Bagan said, I don't want to be the first prime minister to dismantle settlement. But he did. Why? Because of the law.
Speaker C: No.
Speaker A: I had nothing to do with anything.
Speaker B: It was a negotiation, each of which wanted certain Palestinians.
Speaker A: The law had nothing to do with anything.
Speaker B: Repeatedly in the negotiations.
Speaker A: You're not listening.
Speaker B: I know you're missing negotiations. The law has nothing to do with anything. With two foreign relations of us. Volumes on it.
Speaker A: Nobody cared about the law.
Speaker B: The Palestinians kept saying, we want existence.
Speaker A: They weren't there.
Speaker B: Allow me to finish. The Palestinians kept saying, we want what Egypt got. We want what Egypt got. Egypt got everything back.
Speaker A: Nothing to do with the law.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: Nothing to do.
Speaker B: And number two, I'm not saying it's the whole picture, but as foreign Minister Moishe Dayan said at the time, he said, if a car has four wheels and you remove one wheel, the car can't move. And for them, removing Egypt from the arab front would then remove any arab military threat to Israel. No, the first part did. And that's what the Palestinians kept saying, we want Egypt got from what's true.
Speaker A: But forget international law.
Speaker B: And by the way, one last thing, one last on a personal note, the quote about Sharma el Sheikh without peace. Okay. That's the only thing you ever cited from a book of mine. You cried.
Speaker A: I cited from your book.
Speaker B: Yes. I was absolutely shocked at your betrayal of your people. That was pure treason. It was.
Speaker A: I apologize for that. I apologize.
Speaker B: I apologize.
Speaker C: All right.
Speaker E: Well, let me try once again for the region and for just entirety of humanity, what gives you hope? We just heard a lot of pessimistic, cynical takes. What gives you hope?
Speaker A: Like war? That's a good reason. That's hope. In other words, the fear of war, the disaster of war should give people an impetus to try and seek peace.
Speaker E: When you look at people in Gaza and people in the West bank, people.
Speaker A: In Israel, they should want.
Speaker E: Fundamentally, no. But fundamentally they hate war.
Speaker A: Yes, I think so.
Speaker E: What gives you hope?
Speaker B: There is no hope. No. It's an extreme. No, I'm, hey, I'm not happy to say that.
Speaker C: Of course you are.
Speaker B: It's a, it's a very bleak moment right now because that I agree with.
Speaker A: I agree with.
Speaker B: Israel believes it has to restore what it calls its deterrence capability. I think you've written about it, actually. I just realized Israel has to restore its deterrence capability. And after the catastrophe of October 7, restoring its deterrence capacity means this part. You didn't write about the annihilation of Gaza and then moving on to the Hezbollah. No.
Speaker A: No.
Speaker B: So the Israelis are dead set on restoring that deterrence capability on the arab side. And I know Mooween and I have disagreed on it and we're allowed to disagree. I think the arab side, the lesson they learned from October 7 is Israelis aren't as strong as we thought they were.
Speaker A: And that would be an unfortunate, unfortunately, that's really what they believe.
Speaker B: And they think that there is a military option, though. And I think that it's a zero sum game at this point. And it's very, very bleak. And I'm not going to lie about that now. I will admit my predictive capacities are not perfect, are limited, but for the moment, it's a very bleak situation.
Speaker A: That I agree.
Speaker B: And I don't see right now a way out. However, at the very minimum, permanent ceasefire and inhuman and illegal blockade of Gaza. And why is it illegal?
Speaker A: They were shooting rockets at Israel for 20 years. Why is that illegal? To blockade Gaza?
Speaker C: He thinks they bottle rocks.
Speaker B: Why is it illegal? I'll tell you why.
Speaker A: You don't rocket your neighbor, expect consequences.
Speaker D: But that works both ways.
Speaker B: I know, Professor Barr, both ways. I'll tell you why. Because every human rights, humanitarian and UN organization in the world has said, you know, nobody cares about. Is a form of collective punishment. Nobody cares about illegal. Under international.
Speaker A: The word illegal.
Speaker B: You think a blockade.
Speaker A: You don't understand the way the world works.
Speaker B: Yes. And these things. And you think confining. Because that's the blockade.
Speaker A: Yes. You don't.
Speaker B: Confining, confiding. A million children. Combining.
Speaker A: That's the choice.
Speaker B: Combining. That's a million children. In what the Economist called a human rubbish sheep.
Speaker A: The economist supported Israel in this war.
Speaker B: And continued to support Israel, what International Committee of Red Cross called a sinking ship with the UN high commissioner for Human Rights called a toxic slum. You think it is a slum? Of course you think. But it's caused by international law. You think it's legitimate.
Speaker A: Forget to call.
Speaker B: Hey, I know you want to forget the law. What about one thing that every. It's what every Israeli fears the most. What the law, sippy, literally said. I studied international law. I oppose international law. Of course you don't want to hear about the law, then.
Speaker A: It's got nothing to do with anything.
Speaker B: Okay, so here's the thing then. Don't complain about October 7. If you don't want. If you want to say. All I said was there is no international humanitarian law. There's no distinction between civilians and combatants.
Speaker A: There should be.
Speaker B: And so now you're doing what Marine said. You're becoming very selective about the law. If you want to forget about the law. Hamas had every right to do what it did. It had every right to do what it did. According to you, not to me. Cause you want to forget the law.
Speaker C: Do you still support the Houthis shooting random shit?
Speaker B: Absolutely.
Speaker C: Okay. That's a violation of international law. You play the same games.
Speaker B: Absolutely. And were there a power during World War two who had the courage of the Houthis? Were there a power that had that kind of courage?
Speaker C: Outrageous. To be bombing merchant ships while tens of thousands of people died. Actual starvation. Not the starvation that exists in the Gaza Strip, where people before October don't die of starvation, not the concentration campus.
Speaker A: What about starvation in Yemen? Don't they have something? Yes, I know.
Speaker B: Don't they have anything?
Speaker A: Shouldn't they be feeding the Yemeni?
Speaker B: Why fight starvation?
Speaker A: Why fight the western powers in Israel when you should be taking care of your problems at home?
Speaker D: The Houthis, often the only allies of the dispossessed, are those who experience similar circumstances.
Speaker A: Don't you think that they should take care of the yemeni problems?
Speaker B: I'm very happy. I'm very happy they're helping out the Palestinians. Anyone who helps anybody, anybody who comes to the aid of those suffering a genocide has no genocide, half of whom are children. Yeah. According to the most current UN reports, as of today, one quarter of the population of Gaza is starving. That means 500,000 children are starving. Are on the verge of famine.
Speaker A: They keep saying on the verge of. I have not seen. I have not seen one palestinian die of starvation in these last four months. Not one.
Speaker D: There have been cases.
Speaker A: They're on the verge.
Speaker D: They have been documented.
Speaker A: I haven't seen them.
Speaker C: Yesterday, Al Jazeera said six, and the day before that, they said two. So those are the two.
Speaker A: That number probably dies in Israel, starvation also.
Speaker D: I don't think there's famine in Israel.
Speaker A: There isn't. There isn't in the Gaza Strip either. It's something which is produced for the western.
Speaker D: There are infants dying due to a engineered lack of access to food.
Speaker A: And I don't think it's engineered. I think if the Hamas stopped shooting.
Speaker D: Perhaps, as you said, engineered.
Speaker B: I think amnesty and excuse me, Human Rights Watch called it using starvation as a weapon. That's called engineering.
Speaker A: Okay?
Speaker C: That's what they did. But you were pushed on this by Colman Hughes to bring up, like, an example of why is the Gaza strip, like, by what metric are they starving? By what metric is it so behind the rest of the world, you know.
Speaker D: If we're gonna bring up.
Speaker C: I want to hear an answer that. Cause he didn't answer.
Speaker B: I'm happy to answer it.
Speaker C: Yeah.
Speaker B: I just called you from the humanitarian organizations. They said one quarter of the population of Gaza is now verging on famine.
Speaker C: Before October 7.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker C: Before October 7.
Speaker B: I'm not going before October 7.
Speaker C: That's where you use that as justification for Hamas fighting. You say the conditions were unlivable. They had to fight.
Speaker B: I said to him.
Speaker C: So my question is, what made it unlivable prior to October 7? What are the. What are the metrics that you're using?
Speaker B: There were about five, six, or seven reports issued by UNC, dad. Issued by the World bank, issued by the International Monetary Fund. And they all said, that's why. That's why.
Speaker C: Why did they say why? Why did they say that's why the.
Speaker B: Economist, not a radical periodical, described Gaza as a human rubbish.
Speaker C: So tell me by what metrics. If you're, if you're a historian, tell me what they said. Tell me by what.
Speaker B: Mister Pinel.
Speaker C: He's not going to answer again.
Speaker B: I. I don't think I've avoid any of your questions. Except. Except when they breached. When they breached a threshold of complete imbecility.
Speaker C: Tell me what metric the Gaza Strip is.
Speaker B: You remember what I said a moment ago? I said to Professor Morris, I defer to expertise. I look at what the organization say, I look at what the United Nations High commissioner.
Speaker C: You don't know. You don't know. You don't care. Okay, I don't know.
Speaker B: You know how complicated. Have you ever investigated how complicated is the metric for hunger, starvation and famine? It is such a complicated metric, they figured out if you asked me to repeat it now, I couldn't do it.
Speaker C: And yet we have a human development index where we rank countries that we can still measure. Infant mortality, life expectancy. Yeah, we can measure all of these things.
Speaker E: Maureen, I'm holding out for you here. You still didn't answer the hope question. What gives you a source of hope about the region?
Speaker D: Well, first of all, I would agree with Benny Morris and Norman Finkelstein that the current situation is bleak. And I think it would be unreasonable to expect it to not get even bleaker in the coming weeks and months. And we now this conflict, really, it originated in the late 19th century. It's been been a more or less active conflict since the 1920s, 1930s, and has produced a tremendous amount of suffering and regional conflict and geopolitical complications and all of that. But what gives me hope is that throughout their entire ordeal, the palestinian people have never surrendered, and I believe they never will surrender to overwhelming force and violence. They have taken everything that Israel has thrown at them. They have taken everything that the west has thrown at them. They have taken everything that those who are supposed to be their natural allies have on occasion thrown at them. But this is a people that never has and I believe never will surrender. And at a certain point, I think Israel and its leaders will have to come to the realization that by hook or by crook, these people are going to achieve their inalienable and legitimate national rights. And that that is going to be a reality.
Speaker A: What do you mean by that? You mean all of Palestine? Is that what you mean?
Speaker D: No.
Speaker A: From the river to the sea?
Speaker D: Well, ideally, of course, yes. And what I was an inalienable rights. No, what I was saying earlier and then the discussion got sidetracked, is that I did believe that a two state settlement, a partition of Palestine along the 1967 boundaries, would have been a reasonable solution because I think it also would have opened pathways to further. But now you believe what further nonviolent engagement between Israel and the Palestinians that could create other forms of coexistence in a federal or binational or.
Speaker C: What do you think about refugees in regards to that? Do you think there has to be a resettlement of the five or 6 million? Whoever wants to lay claim to be.
Speaker D: I think there has to be an explicit acknowledgement of a responsibility and the return and of their rights. I think that in the framework of a two state settlement, I think a formula would need to be found that does not undermine the foundations of a two state settlement. And I don't think it would be that difficult because I suspect that there are probably large numbers of palestinian refugees who, once their rights are acknowledged, will find it exceptionally distasteful, exceptionally distasteful to have to live among the kind of sentiments that we've heard around this table today, to be quite frank. I mean, I heard, I was previously unfamiliar with you and I watched one of your preparation videos. Very disconcerting stuff, I have to say. You were explaining two days ago in the discussion about apartheid and how absurd it was that in your view, Jim Crow was not apartheid. Jim Crow was not apartheid, but arab states not giving citizenship to palestinian refugees is apartheid. That's what I meant with my earlier comments about white supremacy.
Speaker C: So my issue, that's great, the white supremacy come out.
Speaker D: And if I.
Speaker C: Well, hold on, let me respond. My issue is that I feel like we have jumped on this euphemistic treadmill. And I think that's part of the reason why this conflict will never get solved is because on one end you've got a people who are now convinced internationally that they're victims of apartheid, genocide, concentration camp conditions, ethnic cleansing. They're forced to live in an open air prison with all of these things that are stacked against them, all of these terms that are highly specific, that refer to very precise things. And then when people like you said.
Speaker D: That they think nothing less from someone who doesn't think Jim Crow is apartheid.
Speaker C: I don't know if Jim Crow, Crow who does think the problem is you're morally loading. For you, apartheid is when racists do bad things.
Speaker D: No. Right. There's a definition of apartheid.
Speaker C: That's great.
Speaker D: But there's a very clear definition of.
Speaker C: Top down racial domination enacted through top down, like federal legislative policies or whatever means that. I don't know if. I don't know if Jim Crow would've qualified for a partner. That doesn't make it any less. Excuse me, Finkelstein, I'm talking right now. Excuse me. Excuse me, twinkle scene. I'm talking to your friend over here. I don't know if it would have qualified as the crime of apartheid. Just like if Israel were to literally nuke the Gaza Strip and kill 2 million people. I don't know if that would qualify for the crime of.
Speaker D: In your eyes, probably not.
Speaker C: I don't. Well, yeah, but. Because genocide requires a special intent, I think the issue is instead of. And I think this conversation actually is emblematic of the entire conversation. I don't think anything.
Speaker D: Let me finish answering.
Speaker C: Well, sure, but you accuse me of supporting racism, so. Yeah.
Speaker D: And you are.
Speaker B: I.
Speaker C: Did. You think I support Jim Crow law?
Speaker D: Look, when the fact that you can't.
Speaker C: Even answer that honestly, it doesn't matter that 800 civilians were killed by Hamas, you said, well, maybe 400 were killed by Israel. No, I know the number. Maybe you said 400. You co signed the opinion.
Speaker D: No, I didn't. No, I didn't.
Speaker C: Wait, how many? I think the word was some. That's what I heard.
Speaker D: Well, you weren't listening.
Speaker C: How many people do you think, approximately. If you had to ball. If you had to ballpark it, how many do you think were killed by Hamas on October 7?
Speaker D: I think it's pretty clear. Clear that the majority of civilians that.
Speaker C: Were killed, 51% or 90%.
Speaker D: Don't ask me to put a number. I just want a bulk.
Speaker C: Those are two very different intuitions.
Speaker D: First of all, are you. When you say Hamas, do you mean Palestinians, or do you mean Hamas, palestinian force?
Speaker C: I don't like to say Palestinians because I don't think all palestinian civilians were involved. No, Hamas, Islamic, God, whatever outcome.
Speaker D: That's how this discussion started. You said Hamas, and I began to answer that, and then Benny Morris said, actually, he means Hamas, in addition to jihad and the others. So.
Speaker C: So, of the invading palestinian force, how many do you think killed civilians versus the IDF? What do you think? The ballpark? The percentage?
Speaker D: Well, the figures we have are that about a third of the casualties on October 7 were military, two thirds were. What's your question?
Speaker C: How many? What percentage of civilians were killed by the invading force?
Speaker D: I think a clear majority. But I can't give you a specific figure.
Speaker C: If you thought it was closer to 51% or 99% were killed by. It's interesting to actually stake out a position if you want to be completely agnostic on it.
Speaker B: Complete ignorance. Because we don't know. Professor Morris doesn't know. Moen Robban, you can speak with absolute.
Speaker C: Certainty that the IDF is targeting and murdering palestinian children intentionally. You see the double standard.
Speaker B: No, I don't.
Speaker C: You see, I know you don't know. It was a rhetorical question.
Speaker B: Obviously you don't. Why? Because you're uneducated on the matter. I looked at the UN report. I looked at the Goldstone report. No, the UN report on the great March of return in 2018. And they said that the snipers were targeting children, medics, journalists and disabled people.
Speaker D: Just as they are now in this context.
Speaker B: Exactly.
Speaker D: No more journalists have been killed in the last several months in Gaza than in any other conflict.
Speaker C: In all of world War two.
Speaker D: Hamas is not killing journalists.
Speaker C: Do you agree that they operate in civilian uniforms, that their goal is to induce that confusion, that that's the way that they conduct themselves militarily?
Speaker D: Let me finish my point. More journalists have been more.
Speaker B: You want to hear it? So.
Speaker C: No, because it's. It is virtuous.
Speaker B: Yeah. Yes.
Speaker C: Like when you say children over and over again.
Speaker B: Talking about how many Israelis were killed. That's not virtue signaling, because that's human.
Speaker C: I care about. I don't care if the responsibility.
Speaker B: Norm Moen mentions that more journalists were killed in Gaza than in all of world War two.
Speaker C: Doesn't get it. That doesn't end there anymore.
Speaker B: Medics were killed.
Speaker A: That's silly.
Speaker B: And he says it's virtually. But when Israelis get killed, that's serious.
Speaker C: I never said it's serious on both sides.
Speaker B: I'm not virtual signal.
Speaker C: I'm asking a substantive question of who do you assign blame to? Or do you play into Norm Finkelstein's conspiracies that the ambulances should have known immediately who was dead, that the numbers were changed because they were fake? Or that maybe 51% of the people were killed by Hamas and Islamic Jihad, but 49% were killed by IDF helicopters?
Speaker D: You asked me a direct question and you got a direct answer. I didn't.
Speaker C: I got majority, which could be an. I said a clear one to 99.
Speaker D: I said a clear majority.
Speaker A: What percent is a clear majority? As opposed to.
Speaker C: Oh, wait, they live in anthropology.
Speaker D: The clear majority, in my view, is well over 50%. Please don't ask me to be more precise, because I.
Speaker A: You could say 80, 90, 95.
Speaker D: If I knew that, I would say it.
Speaker A: I think it's a reasonable. It's a reasonable.
Speaker D: Perhaps it is, but I.
Speaker B: You're not the best person to be asking that question. You know, I read when you wrote, described Operation Defensive Shield, and you said a few dozen homes were destroyed.
Speaker A: You're talking about what happened in Jenin refugee camp. And you said, no, the Arabs said 500. You guys said 500 Palestinians were killed in. No, but that was the statement of the PLO Palestinian Authority.
Speaker B: You said a few dozen and that.
Speaker A: There were massacres there.
Speaker B: A few dozen, yes, a few dozen homes.
Speaker C: Yeah.
Speaker B: Well, it turned out a 140 building. Buildings were destroyed. 5000. 5000 people. 5000 people were left homeless.
Speaker A: How many killed?
Speaker B: 5000.
Speaker A: How many?
Speaker B: You described it. No, I'm talking about homes destroyed. So you're not the best person to be criticizing what Moines says when he says clear majority, but he can't say more. You know why he can't say more?
Speaker A: He doesn't.
Speaker B: He doesn't know.
Speaker A: Yeah, yeah, I understand that.
Speaker B: I hope as a historical.
Speaker D: If I was trying to belittle, I would give you a very different answer. I would just say, I don't know. I do know, if you want the.
Speaker A: Right phrase, there would be. The overwhelming majority were killed by arab gunmen, and very small number were killed by Israelis by accident or whatever. That's probably. That's probably that.
Speaker D: Maybe I can state with confidence a clear majority. Overwhelming majority, you may be correct, but I can't state that with certainty. I think there's a very easy way to find out, is to have an independent.
Speaker A: Forget independent.
Speaker D: Well, of course you forget independent.
Speaker A: UN high commissioner, independent human rights.
Speaker B: Just repeat, they're all barbaric countries.
Speaker A: Assyrian was the head of the UN Commission for Human Rights, but if it.
Speaker D: Wasn'T israeli, it would have been okay.
Speaker A: He certainly would have been more honest than Israel.
Speaker D: Yeah. From your perspective.
Speaker E: But to disagree with Stephen, I thought this was extremely valuable at times. Really like the view of history, the passion. I'm really grateful that you would spend your really valuable time. And just one more question, since we have two historians here. Well, just briefly, from a history perspective, what do you hope your legacy as historians, Benny and Norm, will be of the work that you've put out there? Maybe, Norm, you can go first and try to just say briefly, I think.
Speaker B: There'S a value to preserving the record. I'm not optimistic about where things are going to end up. There was a very nice book written by a woman named Helen Hunt Jackson at the end of the 19th century, describing what was done to the Native Americans. She called it a century of dishonor. And she described in vivid, poignant detail what was done to the Native Americans. Did it save them? No. Did it help them? Probably not. Did it preserve their memory? Yes, and I think there's a value to that. You know, there was a famous film by Eisenstein, Sergei Eisenstein. It was either battleship Potemkin or mother. I can't remember which one. The last scene was the tsar's troops mowing down all the russian people. He pans the scene, not all the russian people. Yeah, but he pans the massacre. He pans the massacre, but he could.
Speaker D: Have killed a lot more.
Speaker B: And the last words of the movie were proletarians, exclamation point, remember? Exclamation point. And I've seen it as my life's work to preserve the memory and to remember. I didn't expect that anyone would read my book on Gaza. It's very dense. It gives me even a bit of a headache to read at least one of the chapters.
Speaker D: You wrote a book on Gaza.
Speaker B: But I thought that the memory deserves to be preserved.
Speaker D: Amen.
Speaker A: I. Well, I would just say very briefly, unlike my colleague, I think writing the truth about what happened in history in various periods of history, if I've done a little bit of that, I'm happy.
Speaker E: Thank you, Norman. Thank you, Benny. Thank you, Stephen. Thank you, Maureen. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Norman Ficklestein, Benny Morris, Maureen Robani, and Stephen Bonnell. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Lyndon B. Johnson. Peace is a journey of a thousand miles, and it must be taken one step at a time. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
