Speaker 1: The following is a conversation with Keokie Jackson.  He's the CTO of Lockheed Martin, a company that through its long history has created some of the most incredible engineering marvels human beings have ever built, including planes that fly fast and undetected, defense systems that intersect nuclear threats that can take the lives of millions, and systems that venture out into space, the moon, Mars, and beyond.  And these days, more and more, artificial intelligence has an assistive role to play in these systems.  I've read several books in preparation for this conversation.  It is a difficult one, because in part, Lockheed Martin builds military systems that operate in a complicated world that often does not have easy solutions in the gray area between good and evil.  I hope one day this world will rid itself of war in all its forms.  But the path to achieving that in a world that does have evil is not obvious.  What is obvious is good engineering and artificial intelligence research has a role to play on the side of good.  Lockheed Martin and the rest of our community are hard at work at exactly this task.  We talk about these and other important topics in this conversation.  Also, most certainly, both Kyoki and I have a passion for space.  Us, humans, venturing out toward the stars.  We talk about this exciting future as well.  This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast.  If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube, give it five stars on iTunes, support it on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter.  at Lex Friedman, spelled F-R-I-D-M-A-N.  And now, here's my conversation with Keoki Jackson.  I read several books on Lockheed Martin recently.  My favorite in particular is by Ben Rich, Carlos Concord's personal memoir.  It gets a little edgy at times, but from that I was reminded that the engineers at Lockheed Martin have created some of the most incredible engineering marvels human beings have ever built throughout the twentieth century and the twenty-first.  Do you remember a particular project or system at Lockheed or before that at the Space Shuttle Columbia that you were just in awe at the fact that us humans could create something like this?  

Speaker 0: You know, that's a great question.  There's a lot of things that I could draw on there.  When you look at the Skunk Works and Ben Rich's book in particular, of course, it starts off with basically the start of the jet age and the P-Eighty.  I had the opportunity to sit next to one of the Apollo astronauts, Charlie Duke, recently at dinner.  And I said, hey, what's your favorite aircraft?  And he said, well, it was by far the F-one oh four Starfighter, which was another aircraft that came out of Lockheed there.  It was the first Mach two jet fighter aircraft.  They called it the missile with a man in it.  And so those are the kinds of things I grew up hearing stories about.  You know, of course, the SR-Seventy-One is incomparable as, you know, kind of the epitome of speed, altitude, and just the coolest looking aircraft ever.  

Speaker 1: That's a plane...  

Speaker 0: That's a, yeah, intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance aircraft that was designed to be able to outrun, basically go faster than any air defense system.  But I'll tell you, I'm a space junkie.  That's why I came to MIT.  That's really what took me ultimately to Lockheed Martin.  And so Lockheed Martin, for example, has been essentially at the heart of every planetary mission, like all the Mars missions we've had a part in.  And we've talked a lot about the the fiftieth anniversary of Apollo here in the last couple of weeks, right?  But remember, in the year of the Viking Lander on the surface of Mars, just a huge accomplishment.  And when I was a young engineer at Lockheed Martin, I got to meet engineers who had designed various pieces of that mission as well.  So that's what I grew up on, is these planetary missions, the start of the space shuttle era, and ultimately had the opportunity to see Lockheed Martin's part, and we can maybe talk about some of these here, but Lockheed Martin's part in all of these space journeys over the years.  

Speaker 1: Do you dream, and I apologize for getting philosophical at times, or sentimental, I do romanticize the notion of space exploration, So do you dream of the day when us humans colonize another planet like Mars, or a man, a woman, a human being steps on Mars?  

Speaker 0: Absolutely, and that's a personal dream of mine.  I haven't given up yet on my own opportunity to fly into space, but But as you know from the Lockheed Martin perspective, this is something that we're working towards every day.  And of course, you know, we're building the Orion spacecraft, which is the most sophisticated Human rated spacecraft ever built and it's really designed for these deep space journeys, you know starting with the moon But ultimately going to Mars and being the platform, you know from a design perspective we call the Mars base camp to be able to take humans to the surface and And then after a mission of a couple of weeks, bring them back up safely.  And so that is something I want to see happen during my time at Lockheed Martin.  So I'm pretty excited about that.  And I think, you know, once we prove that's possible, you know, Colonization might be a little bit further out, but it's something that I'd hope to see.  

Speaker 1: So maybe you can give a little bit of an overview of, so Lockheed Martin has partnered with a few years ago with Boeing to work with the DOD and NASA to build launch systems and rockets with the ULA.  What's beyond that?  What's Lockheed's mission timeline and long-term dream in terms of space?  the moon.  I've heard you talk about asteroids.  As Mars, what's the timeline?  What's the engineering challenges?  and what's the dream long-term?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, I think the dream long-term is to have a permanent presence in space beyond low-Earth orbit, ultimately with a long-term presence on the Moon and then to the planets, to Mars.  

Speaker 1: Sorry to interrupt on that.  So long-term presence means...  

Speaker 0: Sustained and sustainable presence in an economy, a space economy that really goes alongside that.  

Speaker 1: With human beings and being able to launch perhaps from those, so like hop?  

Speaker 0: But there's a lot of energy that goes in those hops, right?  So I think the first step is being able to get there and to be able to establish sustained bases, right?  And build from there.  And a lot of that means getting As you know, things like the cost of launch down, and you mentioned United Launch Alliance, and so I don't want to speak for ULA, but obviously they're working really hard on their next generation of launch vehicles to maintain that incredible mission success record that ULA has, but ultimately continue to drive down the cost and make the flexibility, the speed, and the access ever greater.  

Speaker 1: So what's the missions that are in the horizon that you could talk to?  Is there a hope to get to the moon?  

Speaker 0: Absolutely, absolutely.  I mean, I think you know this, or you may know this, there's a lot of ways to accomplish some of these goals.  And so that's a lot of what's in discussion today.  But ultimately, the goal is to be able to establish a base essentially in cislunar space that would allow for ready transfer from orbit to the lunar surface and back again.  And so that's sort of that near-term, I say near-term, in the next decade or so vision.  starting off with a stated objective by this administration to get back to the moon in the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the  

Speaker 1: the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the  

Speaker 0: the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the.  Now we're talking about doing that, I'd say more to, I don't wanna say an industrial scale, but a sustained scale, right?  So permanent habitation, regular reuse of vehicles, the infrastructure to get things like fuel, air, consumables, replacement parts, all the things that you need to sustain that kind of infrastructure.  So, those are certainly engineering challenges, there are budgetary challenges, and those are all things that we're going to have to work through.  You know, the other thing, and I shouldn't, I don't want to minimize this, I mean, I'm excited about human exploration, but the reality is our technology and where we've come over the last, you know, forty years essentially, has changed what we can do with robotic exploration as well.  To me, it's incredibly thrilling.  This seems like old news now, but the fact that we have rovers driving around the surface of Mars and sending back data is just incredible.  The fact that we have satellites in orbit around Mars that are collecting weather, they're looking at the terrain, they're mapping, all of these kinds of things on a continuous basis, that's incredible.  And the fact that you got the time lag, of course, going to the planets, but you can effectively have virtual human presence there in a way that we have never been able to do before.  And now with the advent of even greater processing power, better AI systems, better cognitive systems and decision systems.  You put that together with the human piece and we really opened up the solar system in a whole different way.  And I'll give you an example.  We've got OSIRIS-REx, which is a mission to the asteroid Bennu.  So the spacecraft is out there right now on basically a year mapping activity to map the entire surface of that asteroid in great detail.  You know, all autonomously piloted, right?  But the idea then that, and this is not too far away, it's going to go in, it's got a sort of fancy vacuum cleaner with a bucket.  It's going to collect the sample off the asteroid and then send it back here to earth.  And so, we have gone from sort of those tentative steps in the seventies, you know, early landings, video of the solar system.  So now we've sent spacecraft to Pluto, we have gone to comets and intercepted comets, we've brought stardust material back.  So we've gone far and there's incredible opportunity to go even farther.  

Speaker 1: quite crazy that this is even possible.  Can you talk a little bit about what it means to orbit an asteroid with a bucket to try to pick up some soil samples?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, so part of it is just kind of the, you know, these are the same kinds of techniques we use here on Earth for high speed, high accuracy imagery, stitching these scenes together and creating essentially high accuracy world maps, right?  And so that's what we're doing obviously on a much smaller scale with an asteroid.  But the other thing that's really interesting, you put together sort of that neat control and data and imagery problem.  But the stories around how we designed the collection, I mean, is essentially, this is the sort of the human ingenuity element, right?  That essentially, you had an engineer who had a, one day he's like, oh, starts messing around with parts, vacuum cleaner, bucket.  Maybe we could do something like  this.".  And that was what led to what we call the pogo stick collection, right?  Where basically a thing comes down, it's only there for seconds, does that collection, grabs the... Essentially blows the regolith material into the collection hopper and off it goes.  

Speaker 1: It doesn't really land almost.  

Speaker 0: It's a very short landing.  

Speaker 1: Wow, that's incredible.  So what is in those, talk a little bit more about space.  What's the role of the human in all of this?  What are the challenges?  What are the opportunities for humans as they pilot these vehicles in space?  And for humans that may step foot on either the moon or Mars?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, it's a great question because I just have been extolling the virtues of robotic and rovers, autonomous systems, and those absolutely have a role.  I think the thing that we don't know how to replace today is the ability to adapt on the fly to new information, and I believe that will come.  But we're not there yet.  There's a ways to go.  And so, you know, you think back to Apollo XIII and the ingenuity of the folks on the ground and on the spacecraft essentially cobbled together a way to get the carbon dioxide scrubbers to work.  Those are the kinds of things that ultimately, and I'd say not just from dealing with anomalies, but dealing with new information.  You see something and rather than waiting twenty minutes or half an hour, an hour to try to get information back and forth, but be able to essentially re-vector on the fly, collect different samples, take a different approach, choose different areas to explore.  Those are the kinds of things that human presence enables.  There's still a ways ahead of us on the AI side.  

Speaker 1: Yeah, there's some interesting stuff we'll talk about on the teaming side here on Earth.  That's pretty cool to explore.  

Speaker 0: And in space, let's not leave the space piece out.  

Speaker 1: So what does teaming, what does AI and humans working together in space look like?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, one of the things we're working on is a system called Maya, which is, you can think of it, so it's an AI assistant.  In space.  In space, exactly.  And you think of it as the Alexa in space, right?  But this goes hand in hand with a lot of other developments.  And so today's world, everything is essentially model-based, model-based systems engineering to the actual digital tapestry that goes through the design, the build, the manufacture, the testing, and ultimately the sustainment of these systems.  And so our vision is really that, you know, when our astronauts are there around Mars, you're going to have that entire digital library of the spacecraft, of its operations, all the test data, all the test data and flight data from previous missions to be able to look and see if there are anomalous conditions and tell the humans and potentially deal with that before it becomes a bad situation and help the astronauts work through those kinds of things.  And it's not just you know, dealing with problems as they come up, but also offering up opportunities for additional exploration capability, for example.  So that's the vision, is that, you know, these are, you know, take the best of the human to respond to changing circumstances, and rely on the best of AI capabilities to monitor these, you know, this almost infinite number of data points and correlations of data points that humans, frankly, aren't that good at.  

Speaker 1: So how do you develop systems in space like this, whether it's Alexa in space or in general any kind of control systems, any kind of intelligent systems when you can't really test stuff too much out in space.  It's very expensive to test stuff.  So how do you develop such systems?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, that's the beauty of this digital twin, if you will.  And of course, with Lockheed Martin, we've over the past five plus decades been refining our knowledge of the space environment, of how materials behave, dynamics, the controls, the radiation environments, all of these kinds of things.  So we're able to create very sophisticated models.  They're not perfect, but they're very good.  And so you can actually do a lot.  I spent part of my career simulating communication spacecraft, missile warning spacecraft, GPS spacecraft, in all kinds of scenarios and all kinds of environments.  So this is really just taking that to the next level.  The interesting thing is that now you're bringing into that loop a system, depending on how it's developed, that may be non-deterministic.  It may be learning as it goes.  In fact, we anticipate that it will be learning as it goes.  And so that brings a whole new level of interest, I guess, into how do you do verification and validation of these non-deterministic learning systems in scenarios that may go out of the bounds or the envelope that you have initially designed them to.  

Speaker 1: So this system and its intelligence has the same complexity, some of the same complexity a human does.  It learns over time, it's unpredictable in certain kinds of ways.  So you also have to model that when you're thinking about it.  So in your thoughts, it's possible to model the majority of situations, the important aspects of situations here on Earth and in space enough to test stuff?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, this is really an active area of research, and we're actually funding university research in a variety of places, including MIT.  This is in the realm of trust and verification and validation of, I'd say, autonomous systems in general, and then as a subset of that, autonomous systems that incorporate artificial intelligence capabilities.  And this is not an easy problem.  We're working with startup companies, we've got internal R&D, but our conviction is that autonomy and more and more AI-enabled autonomy is going to be in everything that Lockheed Martin develops and feels.  And it's gonna be retrofit, autonomy and AI are gonna be retrofit into existing systems.  They're gonna be part of the design for all of our future systems.  And so maybe I should take a step back and say the way we define autonomy.  So we talk about autonomy essentially a system that composes, selects, and then executes decisions with varying levels of human intervention.  And so you could think of no autonomy.  So this is essentially the human doing the task.  You can think of effectively partial autonomy where the human is in the loop.  So making decisions in every case about what the autonomous system can do.  

Speaker 1: Either in the cockpit or remotely.  

Speaker 0: Or remotely, exactly.  But still in that control loop.  And then there's what you'd call supervisory autonomy.  So the autonomous system is doing most of the work.  The human can intervene to stop it or to change the direction.  And then ultimately full autonomy where the human is off the loop altogether.  And for different types of missions want to have different levels of autonomy.  So now take that spectrum and this conviction that autonomy and more and more AI are in everything that we develop.  The kinds of things that Lockheed Martin does, a lot of times are safety of life critical kinds of missions.  Think about aircraft, for example.  And so we require, and our customers require, an extremely high level of confidence.  One, that we're going to protect life.  Two, that we're going to, that these systems will behave in ways that their operators can understand.  And so this gets into that whole field, again, being able to verify and validate that the systems have been, that they will operate the way they're designed and the way they're expected.  And furthermore, that they will do that in ways that can be explained and understood.  And that is an extremely difficult challenge.  

Speaker 1: Yeah, so here's a difficult question.  I don't mean to bring this up, but I think it's a good case study that people are familiar with.  Boeing's SevenThirtySeven Max commercial airplane has had two recent crashes where their flight control software system failed.  And it's software, so I don't mean to speak about Boeing, but broadly speaking, we have this in the autonomous vehicle space too, semi-autonomous.  when you have millions of lines of code software making decisions, there is a little bit of a clash of cultures because software engineers don't have the same culture of safety often that people who build systems like Lockheed Martin do.  where it has to be exceptionally safe, you have to test this on.  So how do we get this right when software is making so many decisions?  

Speaker 0: Yeah.  And this, uh, there's a lot of things that have to happen.  And by and large, I think it starts with the culture, right?  Which is not necessarily something that a is taught in school or B is something that would come, you know, depending on what kind of software you're developing, it may not be relevant, right?  If you're targeting ads or something like that.  So, and by and large, I'd say not just Lockheed Martin, but certainly the aerospace industry as a whole has developed a culture that does focus on safety, safety of life, operational safety, mission success.  But as you know, these systems have gotten incredibly complex.  And so they're to the point where it's almost impossible, you know, the state space has become so huge that it's impossible to, or very difficult to do a systematic verification across the entire set of potential ways that an aircraft could be flown, all the conditions that could happen, all the potential failure scenarios.  Now, maybe that's soluble.  one day, maybe when we have our quantum computers at our fingertips, we'll be able to actually simulate across an entire, almost infinite state space.  But today, there's a lot of work to really try to bound the system, to make sure that it behaves in predictable ways.  And then have this culture of continuous inquiry and skepticism and questioning to say, did we really consider the right realm of possibilities?  Have we done the right range of testing?  Do we really understand, you know, in this case, you know, human and machine interactions, the human decision process alongside the machine processes.  And so that's that culture that we call it the culture of mission success at Lockheed Martin.  that really needs to be established.  And it's not something, you know, it's something that people learn by living in it.  And it's something that has to be promulgated, you know, and it's done, you know, from the highest levels at a company of Lockheed Martin, like Lockheed Martin.  

Speaker 1: Yeah, and the same is being faced in certain autonomous vehicle companies where that culture is not there because it started mostly by software engineers.  So that's what they're struggling with.  Is there lessons that you think we should learn as an industry and a society from the Boeing Seven-Thirty-Seven MAX crashes?  

Speaker 0: These crashes obviously are tremendous tragedies.  They're tragedies for all of the people, the crew, the families, the passengers, the people on the ground involved.  And, you know, it's also a huge business and economic setback as well.  I mean, you know, we've seen that it's impacting essentially the trade balance of the U.S.  So these are important questions.  And these are the kinds of, you know, we've seen similar kinds of questioning at times.  You go back to the Challenger accident.  And it is, I think, always important to remind ourselves that humans are fallible, that the systems we create, as perfect as we strive to make them, we can always make them better.  And so another element of that culture of mission success is really that commitment to continuous improvement.  If there's something that goes wrong, a real commitment to root cause and true root cause understanding to taking the corrective actions and to making the future systems better.  And, uh, certainly we want to, we strive for, you know, no accidents.  Uh, and if you look at the record of the commercial airline industry as a whole and the commercial aircraft industry as a whole, you know, there's a very nice, uh, decaying exponential to years now where we have no commercial aircraft accidents at all, right.  Yeah.  Or fatal accidents at all.  So that didn't happen by accident.  It was through the regulatory agencies, FAA, the airframe manufacturers, really working on a system to identify root causes and drive them out.  

Speaker 1: So maybe we can take a step back, and many people are familiar, but Lockheed Martin broadly, what kind of categories of systems are you involved in building?  

Speaker 0: Lockheed Martin, we think of ourselves as a company that solves hard mission problems.  And the output of that might be an airplane or a spacecraft or a helicopter or a radar or something like that.  But ultimately we're driven by these, what is our customer?  What is that mission that they need to achieve?  And so that's what drove the SR-XXI, right?  How do you get pictures of a place where you've got sophisticated air defense systems that are capable of handling any aircraft that was out there at the time, right?  So that's what yielded an SR-XXI.  

Speaker 1: Let's build a nice flying camera.  

Speaker 0: Exactly.  And make sure it gets out and it gets back, right?  Got it.  And that led ultimately to really the start of the space program in the US as well.  So now, take a step back to Lockheed Martin of today, and we are on the order of one hundred and five years old now between Lockheed and Martin, the two big heritage companies.  Of course, we're made up of a whole bunch of other companies that came in as well, General Dynamics, kind of go down the list.  Today, you can think of us in this space of solving mission problems.  So obviously on the aircraft side, tactical aircraft, building the most advanced fighter aircraft that the world has ever seen.  We're up to now several hundred of those delivered, building almost a hundred a year.  And of course, working on the things that come after that.  On the space side, we are engaged in pretty much every venue of space utilization and exploration you can imagine.  So I mentioned things like navigation, timing, GPS, communication satellites, missile warning satellites.  We've built commercial surveillance satellites, we've built commercial communication satellites, we do civil space.  So everything from human exploration to the robotic exploration of the outer planets and keep going on the space front.  But a couple of other areas I'd like to put out.  We're heavily engaged in building critical defensive systems.  And so a couple that I'll mention, the Aegis Combat System, this is basically the integrated air and missile defense system for the US and allied fleets.  And so protects carrier strike groups, for example, from incoming ballistic missile threats, aircraft threats, cruise missile threats, and kind of go down the list.  

Speaker 1: So the carriers, the fleet itself is the thing that is being protected.  The carriers aren't serving as a protection for something else.  

Speaker 0: Well, that's a little bit of a different application.  We've actually built a version called Aegis Ashore, which is now deployed in a couple of places around the world.  So that same technology, I mean, basically can be used to protect either an ocean-going fleet or a land-based activity.  Another one, the THAAD program, So THAAD, this is the Theater High Altitude Area Defense, this is to protect relatively broad areas against sophisticated ballistic missile threats.  And so now it's deployed with a lot of US capabilities and now we have international customers that are looking to buy that capability as well.  And so these are systems that defend, not just defend militaries and military capabilities, but defend population areas.  We saw, you know, maybe the first public use of these back in the first Gulf War with the Patriot systems.  And these are the kinds of things that Lockheed Martin delivers.  And there's a lot of stuff that goes with it.  So think about the radar systems and the sensing systems that cue these, the command and control systems that decide how you pair a weapon against an incoming threat, and then all the human and machine interfaces to make sure that they can be operated successfully in very strenuous environments.  

Speaker 1: Yeah, there's some incredible engineering at every front, like you said.  So maybe if we just take a look at Lockheed history broadly, maybe even looking at Skunk Works.  what are the biggest, most impressive milestones of innovation?  So if you look at stealth, I would have called you crazy if you said that's possible at the time.  And supersonic and hypersonic.  So traveling at, first of all, traveling at the speed of sound is pretty damn fast.  And supersonic and hypersonic, three, four, five times the speed of sound.  That seems, I would also call you crazy if you say you can do that.  So can you tell me how it's possible to do these kinds of things?  And is there other milestones and innovation that's going on that you can talk about?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, well let me start on the Skunk Works saga.  And you kind of alluded to it in the beginning.  Skunk Works is as much an idea as a place.  And so it's driven really by Kelly Johnson's Fourteen Principles.  And I'm not gonna list all fourteen of them off.  But the idea, and this I'm sure will resonate with any engineer who's worked on a highly motivated small team before, the idea that if you can essentially have a small team of very capable people who want to work on really hard problems, you can do almost anything.  especially if you kind of shield them from bureaucratic influences, if you create very tight relationships with your customers so that you have that team and shared vision with the customer.  Those are the kinds of things that enable the Skunk Works to do these incredible things.  And, you know, we listed off a number that you brought up.  stealth and I mean this whole, you know, I wish I could have seen Ben Rich with a ball bearing, you know, rolling it across the desk to a general officer and saying, would you like to have an aircraft that has the radar cross section of this ball bearing?  Probably one of the least expensive and most effective marketing campaigns in the history of the industry.  

Speaker 1: So just for people that are not familiar, I mean, the way you detect aircraft, because I'm sure there's a lot of ways, but radar, for the longest time, there's a big blob that appears in the radar.  How do you make a plane disappear so it looks as big as a ball bearing?  What's involved in technology-wise there?  What's, broadly, sort of the stuff you can speak about?  

Speaker 0: I'll stick to what's in Ben Rich's book, but obviously the geometry of how radar gets reflected and the kinds of materials that either reflect or absorb are kind of the couple of the critical elements there.  And it's a cat and mouse game, right?  I mean, radars get better, stealth capabilities get better.  And so it's a really a game of continuous improvement and innovation there.  I'll leave it at that.  

Speaker 1: Yeah, so the idea that something is essentially invisible is quite fascinating.  But the other one is flying fast.  So speed of sound is seven hundred, fifty, sixty miles an hour.  So supersonic is three, you know, Mach three, something like that.  

Speaker 0: Yeah, we talk about supersonic, obviously, and we kind of talk about that as that realm from Mach one up through about Mach five.  And then hypersonic, so, you know, high supersonic speeds would be past Mach five.  And you got to remember Lockheed Martin and actually other companies have been involved in hypersonic development since the late sixties.  You know, you think of everything from the X-Fifteen to the space shuttle as examples of that.  I think the difference now is if you look around the world, particularly the threat environment that we're in today, you're starting to see publicly folks like the Russians and the Chinese saying they have hypersonic weapons capability that could threaten US and allied capabilities, and also basically, you know, the claims are these could get around defensive systems that are out there today.  And so there's a real sense of urgency.  You hear it from folks like the Undersecretary of Defense for Research and Engineering, Dr.  Mike Griffin, and others in the Department of Defense, that hypersonics is something that's really important to the nation.  in terms of both parity but also defensive capabilities.  And so that's something that, you know, we're pleased.  It's something that Lockheed Martin's, you know, had a heritage in.  We've invested R&D dollars on our side for many years.  And we have a number of things going on with various U.S.  government customers in that field today that we're very excited about.  So I would anticipate we'll be hearing more about that in the future from our customers.  

Speaker 1: And I've actually haven't read much about this.  Probably you can't talk about much of it at all, but on the defensive side, it's a fascinating problem of perception, of trying to detect things that are really hard to see.  Can you comment on how hard that problem is and how hard is it to stay ahead, even if we're going back a few decades, stay ahead of the competition?  

Speaker 0: Maybe I'd, again, you got to think of these as ongoing capability development.  And so think back to the early days of missile defense.  So this would be in the eighties, the SDI program.  And in that timeframe, we proved, and Lockheed Martin proved, that you could hit a bullet with a bullet, essentially, which is something that had never been done before, to take out an incoming ballistic missile.  And so that's led to these incredible hit-to-kill kinds of capabilities, PAC-III.  That's the Patriot advanced capability model three that Lockheed Martin builds, the THAAD system that I talked about.  So now hypersonics, they're different from ballistic systems.  And so we got to take the next step in defensive capability.  

Speaker 1: I'll leave that there, but I can only imagine.  You know, let me just comment.  As an engineer, it's sad to know that so much that Lockheed has done in the past is classified.  Or today, you know, and it's shrouded in secrecy.  It has to be by the nature of the application.  So like what I do, so what we do here at MIT, we'd like to inspire young engineers, young scientists, and yet in a lucky case, some of that engineer has to stay quiet.  How do you think about that?  How does that make you feel?  Is there a future where more can be shown or is it just the nature of this world that it has to remain secret?  

Speaker 0: It's a good question.  I think the public can see enough of, including students who may be in grade school, high school, college today, to understand the kinds of really hard problems that we work on.  And, I mean, look at the F-thirty-five, right?  And, you know, obviously a lot of the detailed performance levels are sensitive and controlled.  But, you know, we can talk about what an incredible aircraft this is.  You know, supersonic, supercruise kind of a fighter, a, you know, stealth capabilities.  It's a flying information system in the sky with data fusion, sensor fusion capabilities that have never been seen before.  So these are the kinds of things that I believe, you know, these are the kinds of things that got me excited when I was a student.  I think these still inspire students today.  And the other thing I'd say, I mean, you know, people are inspired by space.  People are inspired by aircraft.  Our employees are also inspired by that sense of mission.  And I'll just give you an example.  I had the privilege to work and lead our GPS programs for some time.  And that was a case where I actually worked on a program that touches billions of people every day.  And so when I said I worked on GPS, everybody knew what I was talking about, even though they didn't maybe appreciate the technical challenges that went into that.  But I'll tell you, I got a briefing one time from a major in the Air Force and he said, I go by call sign GIMP, GPS is my passion.  I love GPS and he was involved in the operational test of the system.  He said, I went, I was out in Iraq and I was on a helicopter, Black Hawk helicopter, and I was bringing back, you know, a sergeant and a handful of troops from a deployed location.  And he said, my job is GPS.  So I asked that sergeant, and he's beating down and kind of half asleep.  And I said, what do you think about GPS?  And he brightened up, his eyes lit up, and he said, well, GPS, that brings me and my troops home every day.  I love GPS.  And that's the kind of story where it's like, okay, I'm really making a difference here in the kind of work.  So that mission piece is really important.  The last thing I'll say is, and this gets to some of these questions around advanced technologies, they're not just airplanes and spacecraft anymore.  For people who are excited about advanced software capabilities, about AI, about bringing machine learning, these are the things that we're doing to exponentially increase the mission capabilities that go on those platforms.  And those are the kinds of things that I think are more and more visible to the public.  

Speaker 1: Yeah, I think autonomy, especially in flight is super exciting.  Do you see if a day, here we go back into philosophy, a future when most fighter jets will be highly autonomous to a degree where a human doesn't need to be in the cockpit in almost all cases?  

Speaker 0: Well, I mean, that's a world that to a certain extent we're in today.  Now these are remotely piloted aircraft to be sure, but we have hundreds of thousands of flight hours a year now in remotely piloted aircraft.  And then if you take the F-thirty-five, there are huge layers, I guess, in levels of autonomy built into that aircraft.  So, that the pilot is essentially more of a mission manager rather than doing the data, the second to second elements of flying the aircraft.  So, in some ways it's the easiest aircraft in the world to fly.  And kind of a funny story on that.  So, I don't know if you know how aircraft carrier landings work.  There's what's called a tail hook, and it catches wires on the deck of the carrier, and that's what brings the aircraft to a screeching halt, right?  And there's typically three of these wires, so if you miss the first or second one, you catch the next one, right?  And, you know, we got a little criticism.  I don't know how true this story is, but we got a little criticism.  The F-thirty-five is so perfect, it always gets the second wire.  So we're wearing out the wire because it always hits that one.  But that's the kind of autonomy that just makes these, that essentially up-levels what the human is doing to more of that mission manager.  

Speaker 1: So much of that landing by the F-thirty-five is autonomous.  

Speaker 0: Well, it's just the control systems are such that you really have dialed out the variability that comes with all the environmental conditions.  You're wearing it out.  So my point is, to a certain extent, that world is here today.  Do I think that we're going to see a day anytime soon when there are no humans in the cockpit?  I don't believe that.  But I do think we're going to see much more human machine teaming, and we're going to see that much more at the tactical edge.  And we did a demo, you asked about what the Skunk Works is doing these days.  And so this is something I can talk about.  But we did a demo with the Air Force Research Laboratory.  We called it Have Radar.  And so using an F-sixteen, as an autonomous wingman.  And we demonstrated all kinds of maneuvers and various mission scenarios with the autonomous F-Sixteen being that so-called loyal or trusted wingman.  And so those are the kinds of things that, you know, we've shown what is possible now.  Given that you've up-leveled that pilot to be a mission manager, now they can control multiple other aircraft.  Think of them almost as extensions of your own aircraft flying alongside with you.  So that's another example of how this is really coming to fruition.  And then I mentioned the landings, but think about just the implications for humans and flight safety.  And this goes a little bit back to the discussion we were having about how do you continuously improve the level of safety through automation while working through the complexities that automation introduces.  So one of the challenges that you have in high-performance fighter aircraft is what's called G-lock.  So this is G-induced loss of consciousness.  So you pull nine Gs, you're wearing a pressure suit, that's not enough to keep the blood going to your brain, you blackout.  And of course that's bad if you happen to be flying low, near the deck or an obstacle or terrain environment.  And so we developed a system in our aeronautics division called Auto GCAS, so Autonomous Ground Collision Avoidance System.  And we built that into the F-XVI.  It's actually saved seven aircraft, eight pilots already.  in a relatively short time it's been deployed.  It was so successful that the Air Force said, hey, we need to have this in the F-XXV right away.  So we've actually done testing of that now on the F-XXV.  And we've also integrated an autonomous air collision avoidance system.  So think the air-to-air problem.  So now it's the integrated collision avoidance system.  But these are the kinds of capabilities, you know, I wouldn't call them AI.  I mean, they're very sophisticated models, you know, of the aircraft dynamics coupled with the terrain models to be able to predict when Essentially, the pilot is doing something that is going to take the aircraft into, or the pilot's not doing something in this case.  But it just gives you an example of how autonomy can be really a lifesaver in today's world.  

Speaker 1: It's like a autonomous, automated emergency braking in cars.  But is there any exploration of perception of, for example, detecting a G-lock that the pilot is out?  So as opposed to perceiving the external environment to infer that the pilot is out, but actually perceiving the pilot directly.  

Speaker 0: Yeah, this is one of those cases where you'd like to not take action if you think the pilot's there.  It's almost like systems that try to detect if a driver's falling asleep on the road, right?  With limited success.  So, I mean, this is what I'd call the system of last resort, right?  Where if the aircraft has determined that it's going into the terrain, get it out of there.  And this is not something that we're just doing in the aircraft world.  And I wanted to highlight, we have a technology we call Matrix, but this is developed at Sikorsky Innovations.  The whole idea there is what we call optimal piloting.  So not optional piloting or unpiloted, but optimal piloting.  So, an FAA certified system, so you have a high degree of confidence.  It's generally pretty deterministic, so we know that it'll do in different situations, but effectively be able to fly a mission with two pilots, one pilot, no pilots.  And you can think of it almost as like a dial of the level of autonomy that you want.  So it's running in the background at all times and able to pick up tasks, whether it's sort of autopilot kinds of tasks or more sophisticated path planning kinds of activities.  To be able to do things like, for example, land on an oil rig in the North Sea in bad weather, zero, zero conditions.  And you can imagine, of course, there's a lot of military utility capability like that.  You could have an aircraft that you want to send out for a crewed mission, but then at night if you want to use it to deliver supplies in an unmanned mode, that could be done as well.  And so there's clear advantages there.  But think about on the commercial side, if you're an aircraft taken, you're going to fly out to this oil rig.  If you get out there and you can't land, then you got to bring all those people back, reschedule another flight, pay the overtime for the crew that you just brought back because they didn't get where they were going, pay for the overtime for the folks that are out there in the oil rig.  This is real economic.  These are dollars and cents kinds of advantages that we're bringing in the commercial world as well.  

Speaker 1: So this is a difficult question from the AI space that I would love it if we're able to comment.  So a lot of this autonomy in AI you've mentioned just now has this empowering effect.  One is the last resort, it keeps you safe.  The other is there's a, with the teaming and in general assistive, assistive AI.  And I think there's always a race.  So the world is full of, the world is complex.  It's full of bad actors.  So there's often a race to make sure that we keep this country safe, right?  But with AI, there is a concern that it's a slightly different race.  There's a lot of people in the AI space that are concerned about the AI arms race.  That as opposed to the United States becoming, having the best technology and therefore keeping us safe, even we lose ability to keep control of it.  So this, the AI arms race getting away from all of us humans.  So do you share this worry?  Do you share this concern when we're talking about military applications that too much control and decision-making capability is giving to software or AI?  

Speaker 0: Well, I I don't see it happening today.  And in fact, this is something from a policy perspective.  Uh, you know, it's.  it's obviously a very dynamic space, but the department of defense has put quite a bit of thought into that.  And maybe before talking about the policy i'll just talk about some of the why and you alluded to it being a sort of a complicated and a little bit scary world out there, but there's some Big things happening today.  You hear a lot of talk now about a return to great powers competition Particularly around China and Russia with the u.s.  But there are some other big players out there as well.  and what we've seen is the deployment of some very I'd say concerning new weapon systems, particularly with Russia and breaching some of the IRBM, Intermediate-Range Ballistic Missile treaties, that's been in the news a lot.  The building of islands, artificial islands in the South China Sea by the Chinese and then arming those islands.  The annexation of Crimea by Russia, the invasion of Ukraine.  So there's some pretty scary things.  And then you add on top of that, the North Korean threat has certainly not gone away.  There's a lot going on in the Middle East with Iran in particular.  And we see this global terrorism threat has not abated, right?  So there are a lot of reasons to look for technology to assist with those problems, whether it's AI or other technologies like hypersonics, which we discussed.  So now, let me give just a couple of hypotheticals.  So people react sort of in the second time frame, right?  You know, your photon hitting your eye to, you know, movement is, you know, on the order of a few tenths of a second kinds of processing time.  So, roughly speaking, computers are operating in the nanosecond timescale, right?  So, just to bring home what that means, a nanosecond to a second is like a second to thirty-two years.  So, seconds on the battlefield, in that sense, literally are lifetimes.  And so if you can bring an autonomous or AI enabled capability that will enable the human to shrink, maybe you've heard the term the OODA loop.  So this whole idea that a typical battlefield decision is characterized by observe.  So information comes in, orient, what does that mean in the context?  Decide, what do I do about it?  And then act, take that action.  If you can use these capabilities to compress that OODA loop to stay inside what your adversary is doing, that's an incredible, powerful force on the battlefield.  

Speaker 1: That's a really nice way to put it, that the role of AI in computing in general has a lot to benefit from just decreasing from thirty-two years to one second, as opposed to, on the scale of seconds and minutes and hours, making decisions that humans are better at making.  

Speaker 0: And it actually goes the other way too.  So that's on the short time scale.  So humans kind of work in the one second, two seconds to eight hours.  After eight hours, you get tired, you gotta go to the bathroom, whatever the case might be.  So there's this whole range of other things.  Think about surveillance and guarding facilities.  Think about moving material, logistics, sustainment.  A lot of these what they call dull, dirty and dangerous things that you need to have sustained activity, but it's sort of beyond the length of time that a human can practically do as well.  So there's this range of things that are critical in military and defense applications that AI and autonomy are particularly well suited to.  Now, the interesting question that you brought up is, okay, how do you make sure that stays within human control?  And that, so that was the context for now the policy.  And so there is a DOD directive called, uh, three thousand dot O nine, because that's the way we name stuff in this world.  And I'd say it's well worth reading.  It's only a couple of pages long, but it makes some key points.  And it's really around making sure that there's human agency and control over use of semi-autonomous and autonomous weapon systems.  Making sure that these systems are tested, verified and evaluated in realistic, real world type scenarios.  Making sure that the people are actually trained on how to use them.  Making sure that the systems have human machine interfaces that can show what state they're in and what kinds of decisions they're making.  Making sure that you establish doctrine and tactics and techniques and procedures for the use of these kinds of systems.  and so And by the way, I mean this none of this is easy But it I'm just trying to lay kind of the picture of how the u.s.  Has said this is the way we're going to treat AI and autonomous systems that it's not a free-for-all and Like there are rules of war and rules of engagement with other kinds of systems think chemical weapons biological weapons We need to think about the same sorts of implications And this is something that's really important for Lockheed Martin.  I mean, obviously we are a hundred percent complying with our customer and the policies and regulations.  But I mean, AI is an incredible enabler, say within the walls of Lockheed Martin in terms of improving production efficiency, helping engineers doing generative design, improving logistics, driving down energy costs.  I mean, there are so many applications.  But we're also very interested in some of the elements of ethical application within Lockheed Martin.  So we need to make sure that things like privacy is taken care of, that we do everything we can to drive out bias in AI-enabled kinds of systems, that we make sure that humans are involved in decisions, that we're not just delegating accountability to algorithms.  And so for us, it all comes back, I talked about culture before and it comes back to sort of the Lockheed Martin culture and our core values.  And so it's pretty simple for us and do what's right, respect others, perform with excellence.  And now how do we tie that back to the ethical principles that will govern how AI is used within Lockheed Martin?  And we actually have a world, so you might not know this, but there are actually awards for ethics programs.  Lockheed Martin's had a recognized ethics program for many years.  And this is one of the things that our ethics team is working with our engineering team on.  

Speaker 1: One of the miracles to me, perhaps a layman, again, I was born in the Soviet Union, so I have echoes, at least in my family history of World War II and the Cold War.  Do you have a sense of why human civilization has not destroyed itself through nuclear war, so nuclear deterrence?  and thinking about the future.  Does technology have a role to play here?  And what does the long-term future of nuclear deterrence look like?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, it's, you know, this is one of those hard, hard questions.  And I should note that Lockheed Martin is, you know, both proud and privileged to play a part in multiple legs of our nuclear and strategic deterrent systems like the Trident submarine-launched ballistic missiles.  You know, you talk about Is there still a possibility that the human race could destroy itself?  I'd say that possibility is real.  But interestingly, in some sense, I think the strategic deterrence have prevented the kinds of incredibly destructive world wars that we saw in the first half of the XXth century.  Now things have gotten more complicated since that time and since the Cold War it is more of a multipolar great powers world today.  Just to give you an example back then, you know There were you know in the in the Cold War time frame just a handful of nations that had ballistic missile capability By last count and this is a few years old.  There's over seventy nations today that have that similar kinds of numbers in terms of space-based capabilities.  So the world has gotten more complex and more challenging, and the threats, I think, have proliferated in ways that we didn't expect.  The nation today is in the middle of a recapitalization of our strategic deterrent.  I look at that as one of the most important things that our nation can do.  

Speaker 1: What is involved in deterrence?  Is it Is it being ready to attack, or is it the defensive systems that catch attacks?  

Speaker 0: A little bit of both.  And so it's a complicated game theoretical kind of program.  But ultimately, we are trying to prevent the use of any of these weapons.  And the theory behind prevention is that even if an adversary uses a weapon against you, you have the capability to essentially strike back and do harm to them.  that's unacceptable.  And so that will deter them from making use of these weapon systems.  Um, the deterrence calculus has changed, of course, with, uh, you know, more nations now having these kinds of weapons.  But I think, you know, from my perspective, it's very important, uh, you know, to maintain a strategic deterrent.  You have to have systems that you will know, you know, will work when they're required to work.  You know that they have to be adaptable to a variety of different scenarios in today's world.  And so that's what this recapitalization of systems that were built over previous decades, making sure that they are appropriate, not just for today, but for the decades to come.  So, the other thing I'd really like to note is strategic deterrence has a very different character today.  We used to think of weapons of mass destruction in terms of nuclear, chemical, biological.  And today we have a cyber threat.  We've seen examples of the use of cyber weaponry.  And if you think about the possibilities of using cyber capabilities or an adversary attacking the US to take out things like critical infrastructure, electrical grids, water systems, Um, those are scenarios that are strategic in nature to the survival of a nation as well.  So that is the kind of world that we live in today.  Um, and you know, part of my hope on this is one that we can also develop technical or technological systems, perhaps enabled by AI and autonomy that will allow us to contain and to fight back against these kinds of new threats that were not conceived when we first developed our strategic determinants.  

Speaker 1: Yeah, I know that Lockheed is involved in cyber, so I saw that you mentioned that.  It's an incredibly, nuclear almost seems easier than cyber because there's so many attack, there's so many ways that cyber can evolve in such an uncertain future.  But talking about engineering with a mission, I mean, in this case, you're engineering systems that basically save the world.  

Speaker 0: Well, like I said, we're privileged to work on some very challenging problems for very critical customers here in the U.S.  and with our allies abroad as well.  

Speaker 1: Lockheed builds both military and non-military systems, and perhaps the future of Lockheed may be more in non-military applications, if you talk about space and beyond.  I say that as a preface to a difficult question.  So President Eisenhower in the year of his farewell address talked about the military-industrial complex, and that it shouldn't grow beyond what is needed.  So, what are your thoughts on those words, on the military-industrial complex, on the concern of growth of their developments beyond what may be needed?  

Speaker 0: That where it may be needed is a critical phrase, of course.  And I think it is worth pointing out, as you noted, that Lockheed Martin, we're in a number of commercial businesses from energy to space to commercial aircraft.  And so I wouldn't neglect the importance of those parts of our business as well.  I think the world is dynamic and there was a time, it doesn't seem that long ago to me, I was a graduate student here at MIT and we were talking about the peace dividend at the end of the Cold War.  If you look at expenditure on military systems as a fraction of GDP, we're far below peak levels of the past.  And to me, at least, it looks like a time where you're seeing global threats changing in a way that would warrant relevant investments in defensive capabilities.  The other thing I'd note, For military and defensive systems, it's not quite a free market, right?  We don't sell to people on the street.  And that warrants a very close partnership between, I'd say, the customers and the people that design, build, and maintain these systems.  Because of the very unique nature the very difficult requirements, the very great importance on safety and on operating the way they're intended every time.  And so that does create, and it's frankly, it's one of Lockheed Martin's great strengths is that we have this expertise built up over many years in partnership with our customers to be able to design and build these systems that meet these very unique mission needs.  

Speaker 1: Yeah, because building those systems is very costly, there's very little room for mistake.  Ben Rich's book and so on just tells the story.  It's nerve-wracking just reading it.  If you're an engineer, it reads like a thriller.  Let's go back to space for a second.  

Speaker 0: I'm always happy to go back to space.  

Speaker 1: So, a few quick, maybe out there, maybe fun questions, maybe a little provocative.  What are your thoughts on the efforts of the new folks, SpaceX and Elon Musk?  What are your thoughts about what Elon is doing?  Do you see him as competition?  Do you enjoy competition?  What are your thoughts?  

Speaker 0: Yeah, first of all, certainly Elon, I'd say SpaceX and some of his other ventures are definitely a competitive force in the space industry.  And do we like competition?  Yeah, we do.  And we think we're very strong competitors.  I think competition is what the U.S.  is founded on in a lot of ways, and always coming up with a better way.  And I think it's really important to continue to have fresh eyes coming in, new innovation.  I do think it's important to have level playing fields, and so you want to make sure that you're not giving different requirements to different players.  But, you know, I tell people, you know, I spent a lot of time at places like MIT.  I'm going to be at the MIT Beaverworks Summer Institute over the weekend here.  And I tell people this is the most exciting time to be in the space business in my entire life.  And it is this explosion of new capabilities that have been driven by things like the massive increase in computing power, things like the massive increase in comms capabilities, advanced and additive manufacturing are really bringing down the barriers to entry in this field and it's driving just incredible innovation.  And it's happening at startups, but it's also happening at Lockheed Martin.  not realize this, but Lockheed Martin working with Stanford actually built the first CubeSat that was launched here out of the US.  that was called QuakeSat.  And we did that with Stellar Solutions.  This was right around just after two thousand, I guess.  And so we've been in that from the very beginning.  And I talked about some of these like Maya and Orion, but we're in the middle of what we call smartsats and software-defined satellites that can essentially restructure and remap their purpose, their mission on orbit to give you almost unlimited flexibility for these satellites over their lifetimes.  So, those are just a couple of examples, but yeah, this is a great time to be in space.  

Speaker 1: Absolutely.  So, Wright Brothers flew for the first time, one hundred and sixteen years ago.  So, now we have supersonic stealth planes and all the technology we've talked about.  What innovations, obviously you can't predict the future, but do you see Lockheed in the next hundred years, if you take that same leap?  How will the world of technology and engineering change?  I know it's an impossible question, but nobody could have predicted that we could even fly a hundred and twenty years ago.  So what do you think is the edge of possibility that we're going to be exploring in the next hundred years?  

Speaker 0: I don't know that there is an edge.  We've been around for almost that entire time, right?  The Lockheed brothers and Glenn L. Martin starting their companies in the basement of a church and an old service station.  We're very different companies today than we were back then, right?  And that's because we've continuously reinvented ourselves over all of those decades.  I think it's fair to say, I know this for sure, the world of the future, it's going to move faster, it's going to be more connected, it's going to be more autonomous, and it's going to be more complex than it is today.  And so this is the world, as a CTO at Lockheed Martin, that I think about, what are the technologies that we have to invest in?  Whether it's things like AI and autonomy, you can think about quantum computing, which is an area that we've invested in to try to stay ahead.  of these technological changes and frankly some of the threats that are out there.  I believe that we're going to be out there in the solar system, that we're going to be defending and defending well against probably military threats that nobody has even thought about today.  We are going to be, we're gonna use these capabilities to have far greater knowledge of our own planet, the depths of the oceans, you know, all the way to the upper reaches of the atmosphere and everything out to the sun and to the edge of the solar system.  So that's what I look forward to.  And I'm excited, I mean, just looking ahead in the next decade or so to the steps that I see ahead of us in that time.  

Speaker 1: I don't think there's a better place to end, Koki.  Thank you so much.  

Speaker 0: Lex, it's been a real pleasure, and sorry it took so long to get up here, but I'm glad we were able to make it happen.  