Transcription for Roger Gracie： Greatest Jiu Jitsu Competitor of All Time ｜ Lex Fridman Podcast #343.mp3:
Full transcript: In my mind, I have to tap everybody else. Winning is not enough. The following is a conversation with Hadja Gracey, widely considered to be the greatest jiu jitsu competitor of all time. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Hodjer Gracie. Let's start with possibly the greatest match in jiu jitsu history. Your second match against Buchesia. Let's go through the details. Let's go through the whole thing. So the walk leading up to it, you always do this walk. It's an epic walk. You post on Instagram. Hanzo posted on Instagram this calm walk towards the mat. Well, let's go to that match in particular. What was going through your mind? You've been away from competition, facing probably one of the greatest, and at that time, many people considered the greatest jujitsu competitor of all time in Buchecha. Here's the old man, the old timer. Getting back out there, what were you thinking? Yeah, I think that's the first time since probably I got my black belt that I wasn't the favorite walking to a fight. I have to say, like, a lot of people thought consider him the favorite. I mean, understandable, you know, I was out of competition for a while. He was just winning everything. So, you know, saying about the walk, like, for me, you know, the fight starts way before the referee say go. You know, it's all the focus and concentration that I think is very important for me to start before, like, you know, I almost walk blind to the mat many times. I passed, like, great friends, and I couldn't see anyone. You know, they're trying to talk to you, and I'm like, I'm 100% focused on my opponent already, even though that I cannot even see him in front of me. So I think that's, for me, was always very important to try to clear my mind out from everything. Are you visualizing the opponent or not? Just clearing? Not at that. Not at that time. Is there, what's in your head? Is it like a calm river with birds chirping? What's the blank? Just blank. Darkness? Yeah, darkness. Okay. And that's what we see in that calmness, is just blankness. How hard is it to achieve that blankness? It's difficult to say because I think. I don't remember when I'll say. Probably as a black belt, I try to focus like that, not to think, because it's probably something you learn, is the more you think, the more nervous you get. And there's nothing that you're gonna gain by thinking of the fight or the possibilities. What, you know, what you can't do, what can go wrong, what can go right, because it's unpredictable. You have absolutely no idea. It's impossible to predict the fight. And you discover that if you just let those nervous feelings go and empty your mind, it actually is pretty effective. It is. It makes you feel better. It's, you know, you kind of control your emotion, control the adrenaline on your body up to a level. So it absolutely helps you, you know, focus in the fight. I've learned that in jiu jitsu and in general in life, that whenever something feels really shitty, you can just, like, take that thought and not think about it. Yeah. Like, I do that, like, on long runs or, like a fast run or. Yeah. In jiu jitsu, especially now, you getting older, out of shape, like that feeling of exhaustion. Well, you can always get to the feeling of exhaustion. You could just not think about it. Yeah. Not think about being exhausted. Yeah. Just. And that somehow relaxes you. I think maybe in the face of exhaustion, all the fears start to creep in. Maybe your muscles tighten up. I don't know. This is for the amateur jujutsu person, but it's kind of funny how you can just take that thought and let go of it. So you get, as a black belt competitor, you get used to. You get good at letting go of. Any thoughts. Yeah. When you mention to exhaustion is. That's another good example of it. It's, you know, there's a lot of times in the fight you're getting tired, and you're getting pretty tired, so it's like the last thing you want to think of it is how tired you are. It doesn't matter because it doesn't. What are you gonna do, quit? I mean, it doesn't matter. It's how tired you are. There's no value thinking about it. There's no value, so you just have to go through it. So when you're, like, many minutes into the match and you're slowly moving, as you sometimes do, tying your belt, catching your breath, you're not thinking about anything. You're trying to let go of thinking. I'm trying to, like to save everything, to defy, like, nothing goes to waste. It's, you know, every move unnecessary. It's just going to make you more tired or it's going to take something out of you. Like, you know, I try to calculate every single move I make, save as much energy as I can so I can fully, you know, be focused 100% in the fight with no way, especially energy wise. And that's instinctual, like minimizing the amount of moves. You're not, like, explicitly thinking, should I do this or not? It's just. Just don't move unless it's absolutely required. Yeah. Because fight is. You cannot really. There's no really time to think much, you know, so it's, your instincts are playing. It's like it's, you know, you already have your, you know, your weapons. Let's say, you know, you did the things that you do at. It's just you wait for the perfect moment. The beauty of it is there's the right moment to everything. If you feel 1 second too late, doesn't work, nor you get messy. So it's, you know, you try to catch that moment. That is, you know, and for that, you have to be fully focused on what you're doing because 1 second is you out. It won't work. But you're not exactly known as somebody that moves super quickly. So the moment I. It's not about how quickly you move, it's about the right moment. So you move slowly. Yeah. Yeah. It's not like speed. It's not like you have to move the speed of light. It's the move itself at that precise moment. It doesn't have to be super fast because your opponent's not moving super fast, you know, so it's a combination of moving between you and him. I mean, the same thing happens in judo, and the movement can be really small. Yeah. It's just judo is a bit more explosiveness. You know, it moves on slightly faster. So he did know. He does require a bit more explosiveness in judo. But even just the right timing for an off balance, just a little tug. It's not that, you know, moving, the speed is not going to count that much. Yeah. It's the timing that you initiate that move. You see that with foot sweeps. There's nothing more beautiful than nothing like a olympic level athletes going at it in the Olympics and a perfect. And it's just. And you see one man's life flash before his eyes and realize, like, I'm supposed to be the top three person in the world, that I just find they don't, they have this look on their face like, I don't know what just happened. It's beautiful to see. You don't see that. I guess you see that in boxing, knockouts and stuff like that. You don't know what the hell just. Happened to is that precise moment of movement. That you get caught, like, is that one split second? That's it. Do you get that in jiu jitsu at all? Cause judo has, because of the explosiveness, because of the point scoring system that incentivizes these giant throws, has these moments where everything just turns on a single moment. Do you have that in jiu jitsu? Not really, because Dennis points is. You get, like, you know, two points. So it's because I think regarding the submission is not just one precise movement that changed everything. I think judo is the takedown that counts as a submission. Like ipon fight over jujitsu. Don't have that. So you will. You will score points. But I think in terms of submission, you need to get to in a dominant position first, and then the submission will come slowly. It's a process. Yeah. Okay, let's go back to that guy with his mind. So, actually, in the weeks leading up to it, in the days, in the hours, in the minutes, is there some fear in you leading up to this? I mean, I'm not gonna say, you know, that I'm fearless because everybody fear something. You know, the fear is there, but it's like, how much you let that control you. I think I was a lot more confident than fearful, for sure. Walking through that fight. Like, I was pretty confident that, yeah, I could beat him. What was the source of that confidence? My belief on me, I can take the word. You can take anyone in the world, but is there specific, strategic, like, you know, talking to Donaher, he believes that there's no such thing as confidence. Like, or rather, the way you get confidence is through data, like that. You have proven yourself effective in previous situations, but with bushes, you don't have much data. It was a very, the first time you faced him was a very tough. That was also one of the greatest matches of all time. That's very tough. So doesn't that creep in, like, that doubt because you don't. You don't have enough data to be confident based on. Yeah, I mean, okay, if I never have fought before, you know, suddenly walk into a fight with someone like that, then would I be that confidence? I mean, probably no. You know, so that history of what, you know, what we've been doing, what we've been achieving, does, gives you confidence. If that was my first fight ever, I wouldn't probably. I wouldn't be that confident. But the time off, it doesn't matter. Doesn't matter. Doesn't matter. You don't have the fear or the actual physical experience, the psychological experience of being rusty, of being out of the. Training, that will come out on training. So you, okay, so you simulate some aspect of that in the training. The training will tell you how you are. Did you increase the intensity of the training leading up to this? Yeah, I mean, I trained, I trained normal, let's say, compared to the first fight. The second one was a lot more confidence because, you know, like I said on training, the training for the first fight, you were terrible. So what do you mean? I think I was focusing mma for a while, for a couple months and I wasn't really focusing the gear. And, you know, by the time I accept the fight and start training, like, all my responses on training were off. Like, all my training partners that I used to train with that I destroyed, I mean, now they, like, they beating me, you know, it's like I cannot beat them the way I was used to, but, you know, so I knew something was not right for the first fight, but then it's, you know, no points is submission or draw. So, yeah, for people who don't know, it was in Montremoris, which is a 20 minutes match, submission only. So there's no, the winner's determined only, bye, submission. Otherwise it's a draw. So physically I was, I wasn't myself on that fight. I was tired and my body wasn't responding anyway, so that, so the conflict was different from the first. The second, I think I was confident enough that I wouldn't get tapped out on the first, that I was still gonna fight because he has to tap me out to beat me. And I trust on my defense, I'm confident enough for my defense that he will not tap me out. But in terms of winning, you know, walking to the second fight, I was a lot more confident. What can you say about that feeling when something's not right? Isn't that a thing that breaks people. It's weird. Breaks. It's weird. Like people crack. They give up. You know, this is a big test because it's like being really tired. It's the same thing. It's like a lot of people crack because they just feel they cannot give it more. They have nothing more to give, so they just like give up. It's too hard. So what do you do? Just, again, take the thoughts out. There is no giving up. I mean, I don't mind, I don't care. Like, just giving up is not an option. It's not. That's always the way you thought. Yeah. About jiu jitsu, yeah, I never gave up. I mean, I tapped, it's, you know, not giving up is not tapping. That's just stupid. Especially now during training. Like, it's. I get caught, I tap. I've never, ever hurt myself by not tapping. I get you get angry, you know, train hard, you know, improve, make it, make yourself better. You got caught, accept that you made a mistake, give up, tap, then try harder. So, you know, the not tapping, it's you sacrificing your body, and you know, you'll never be the same. Like, if you let your elbow pop, the elbow will never, ever be the same, ever. You let yourself go to sleep, your resistance drops. So it's. Everybody has a, has a limit of resistance until they, you know, you to resist a choke before you pass out. The moment that you go to sleep, that resistance would dropped. I've never heard anyone say that. That's awesome. That's true. So tap this. So that's the reason, because people usually. Say, it's no, you can, it's the same. Or you getting knocked out. You get knocked out. The first time your resistance dropped, your jaw gets weaker. Just for the record, I've never gone to sleep in GSA, which means my resistance is high, right? I don't know. Must be. Oh, your defense is pretty good. I don't know about that because it doesn't make sense to me. Or maybe in my case, I think my understanding of when I'm screwed is pretty good. There's no, you know, you're in trouble. Yeah. One of the things I regret the most about my jiu jitsu journey is not having given enough time to being in really bad positions. Like, the better I got, I think the less I started being in bad. Positions, which is because you spar. That's like. That is how you train. Yeah. Because you used to just spar. When you spar, it's difficult to be in bad positions a lot. You train with better people. But, I mean, let's say five, six minute rolls, how long you're gonna be in a really bad position? Not long. Right. So you don't really have time to develop. That's why people, they don't train in bad positions. Cause you have to start there over and over again to be used to it. Yeah. Or put yourself there. I just didn't have that mindset. I think. I think you start. I mean, part of the fun of jiu jitsu is as you get better and better, you have certain people you go with. You have these puzzles that you figured out that you're playing, very specific details you're working out, you're trying to improve your main, like, techniques and so on. But, yeah, just the percentage of time you spend being submitted or being, or trying, even going against, like, lower ranks, trying to escape basic submissions is low. I don't know if that's true for most people. Probably is right. Most people have very bad defense because they don't allow themselves to be there. Because, I mean, who wants to get tapped? Because you will until you work on your defense. Of course you're going to get tapped or you're not going to escape. You're going to struggle to escape. So people, they don't want to be there. I regret it most because of the effect it clearly had on how I competed. It was clear that my competition was constantly driven by conservative thinking. Like, don't take risks. I think because of a weak defense, honestly, and I think a lot of any of the fear, like, for example, exhaustion was accompanied by fear because of weak defense. I think if I were to psychoanalyze myself and I regretted it. I regret it a lot. But speaking of which, I don't think anyone's ever submitted you in competition. So you're saying, well, I was a juvenile. Yes. Yes. So when you were a young person. Yeah. Six. That still haunt you? No, this first. I was winning that fight by a large. I mean, I think by six points or four, something like that. But I was like, I was. Remember it, though, huh? By the details. Yeah. You ever beat him again? He never competed again. Whoever you are, please, let's do a podcast. We'll talk shit about Hodra the whole time. No, but what do you attribute to that, too? You're saying you were confident that the top of the world, the number one buchesha, would not submit you. So where is that confidence grounded? And what do you attribute the fact that nobody was able to submit you first? It comes from training. You know, I train a lot. Bad position, like, my defense is good because I practice over and over again as much as I practice all my offensive position. So it's, you know, you have to train both equally. It's not just being a good position. You have to be in bed. So I think that's a very strong part of my game. To be a complete fighter, a complete martial artist, you have to be good in every single position. Every single one. Those that you know you have a weakness. So it's, you know, to be complete, you should have no weakness. So that was always my, you know, I was always very particular on that. Like, it's where my weakness, where I don't feel good at it. If you put them in a position to struggle, how to escape. How do I get out? Everything. Any submission locked penny position, you know, back mount, everything. It doesn't matter which position I up. I practice over and over again. So that when I, if I get there in a fighting situation I will know how to get out. At least I'll have a direction, you know, I will know. This is my way out. Do you practice both escaping the bad position and the transition into the bad position? Avoiding it? Because that's how it happens. You know Jiu jitsu, you start in a neutral position. No, the transition then it then becomes that the fight itself. Being there is most important is when you're there. Then you have to know how to get out. That's your weakness. How stopping the person getting that is something different. They're two different things. Either you practice one or the other, so. But both are important, I guess. But the stopping the person is easier to practice because that comes naturally in training. Yeah. What was the actual process like? What was your biggest weakness throughout your. Like just remembering what was annoying to you to figure out. I mean, outside control is always bottom of psychonaut. Bottom. It's regardless how much you practice, it's not ever easy. You'll never be easy. But it's so annoying it makes no sense. Yeah. Someone pins you down, doesn't want to move much, is a big and strong guy regardless of who is not going to be easy to escape. So some situations are just hard. That must be the. Sorry to interrupt. I'm interrupting hydrograc but you just made me realize if you're really good, if you're, if you're going against like the perfect jiu jitsu competitor, probably. Side control might be one of the hardest positions. Is it the hardest position to escape? It's one of them. If the person doesn't want to progress. It'S concerned about like the best pinners in the world. I mean, partially because I've just seen judo. People that know how to pin. Yeah. They go skip their second choice. A nightmare. It's a nightmare. Doesn't matter how much you practice, it's a nightmare. And it's also just frustrating, I think. I guess it is also frustrating because a lot of people in that position will be about maintaining control, not progressing. And usually people when they're mountain and back control are usually trying to progress towards a submission which opens up opportunities for escape. So what's the actual process of just time and time again putting yourself inside a bottom of side control. Yeah. Over and over again, starting there. Escape, back, escape, get back. If it mount, you, get back. Any situation outside that, stop, start again, stop, start again. And it has to be, I would say, five minutes, because it's the repetition that will teach you, you know, if you train, like, three minutes on top, you have time to, you know, one thing, and then timeout is the repetition that over and over again, you know, when you try the same move over and over again, then you see what can go wrong. And is it understanding the details of the movement or actually doing the movement and feeling it? It's both. First, you have to understand the movement and then practice. But most important thing is defense, escape coming second, because you know he's attacking you. The one thing is if he's not trying to submit you, but the other one, if it is, let's say if a person is very good, has a very good attack, the first thing is defense. Not just escape and expose yourself to even worse position, because that is very risky. When you're trying to escape, you'll always expose yourself to a worse position. So avoiding that it's, you know, first is defense, not getting caught. I. And then when you escaping, don't be in a worse position than you are. So defense, in jiu jitsu, when you're wearing a gi, what does defense entail? Is it mostly grips? Is it mostly the positioning of your hips and legs? It's everything together, because it's a whole body movement. It's constantly moving your arms, legs, body. They have to. Everything works together. Going back to the mind of that guy, so confident. No fear at this point. Is there a bit of ego in there, too? Yes. Like I say, no, I'm not gonna say I'm fearless. Of course, this concerns that fight, I would have to say, was probably the fight that I got nervous the most walking in because I knew what that meant. That fight, that meant everything for me. All my legacy was on the line, because if I lost that fight forever, I would be number two. Yeah, forever. And, I mean, bushisha is a great, great guy, great competitor. JujItsu is very good, but I'm better than him. I knew thAt. But he's competing nonstop at that point. He's a great competitor, you know, taking nothing out of him. He's super tough. Very, very tough. Very good. He's probably the best competitor in jujitsu. No, he won 13 times the world championship. I won ten. So as a competitor, you know, he has more titles than I do, so. But in terms of, you know, AnalyZinG the game, I consider technically better than him. So knowing all that, everything that I build, all my legacy, it's. If I lose both riding on this. Match, if I lose this fight, I'm forever number two. And none of that is going. Going through your mind. No, I knew. I mean, it's not at that moment that I already knew that. I remember just before the curtains open, I'm standing, and before they called my name, and, I mean, my legs were like, I feel the adrenaline kicking on my legs, and I'm like, you know, I'm hitting the legs. I'm like, wake up, you know, get off. Get adrenaline off me, you know. So it was intense. It was intense. And this was in Rio. That was in Rio, so my hometown. So this is. And, you know, Rio is not exactly known for its calmness in its fans. So this is like wherever they hosted the Olympics the year before. Yeah. So this is like, I mean, this, like, the whole basically martial arts community is watching, watching that fight. Yeah. I mean, is there some. Was Hanzo there? Yeah. Yeah. So people are just. I mean, there's a tension. It's also. I mean, I don't know if you felt that in part, but you're also fighting for the Gracie name. Yeah. In our hometown, the greatest. Where the Gracie really stacked. Gracie competitor of all time, arguably, in the hometown. I mean, okay. All my family, my best friends, my friends, everybody watching, everybody there. There was a lot of pressure. A lot. And then were you thinking that you would be able to submit him? No. It's at that point, like, I don't predict how the fight will go, that I never did, because it is unpredictable. I never tried to set any strategy for any fight. I think, oh, okay. That I did, but that was the only time that I set any strategy into a fight. There was a 15 minutes fight there, and I said, first five minutes, I'm gonna play defense. He's bigger, stronger, younger. I don't want to play his game. And I know he comes in very fast. Every single fight he had, you know, he comes very aggressive. So my strategy, walking to the fight, I say, five minutes, I'm going to play defense. I'm not going to try to attack. I'm not going to try to match his pace. I already expected, you know, maybe I'm going to start losing the fight because, you know, if he comes in, there's a risk of me maybe getting take down. You know, something happened. I'm like, I'm gonna stick to the game plan. Five minutes, I'm gonna start picking up the pace. Cause then it's ten minutes to go. Which ten minutes? A long fight. So I don't need to start fast, but I'm gonna start being more aggressive and then, you know, try to take him down, up hookah. You know, by then I'm like, that's as far as strategy goes. So no specific. Stay in the feet. Were you comfortable being both bottom and top in this? Strategically? I'm always comfortable being borrowed top. I prefer to be on top because being in the bottom, the person on top dictates the pace of the fight because he's on top over you. So I always prefer to be on top because I can dictate the pace, I can implement my own pace. And being the bottom, they can slow me down so it's harder. So if I can choose, I will always be on top. But I think by then I was like, it's, you know, five minutes. Hit it. I'm like, he's pretty big and strong. I'm going to spend a lot of energy taking him down. I forgot. How did it, how did it feel? So here you're stepping in, by the way, puzzle, maths. This is old school. As old school as it gets. So calm and relaxed here for people just listening. We're watching the early minutes of the match. Yeah. So just feeling it out. He seems pretty calm, too. He must be nervous, too. I wonder how. Do you ever talk to him? You guys are friends? Yeah, yeah, we're friends. Did he ever say how nervous he was? No, we never spoke about that fight. No. No. He probably lays late at night thinking about it. Maybe. I don't know, that sob. Yeah. I mean, so you see, the first five minutes he kept, I knew what he was going to do. In my study, his game, his stand up is most basic. Is basic in takedowns, leg attacks, double leg. So he goes single, double, and he charged in. That is pretty much his stand up game. See what you get? You get a grip. Yeah, that we got penalized. So do you like to use the. Do you like to post with your left? You have a right foot forward. Usually you're righty right, I'm ready, but I know he wants my leg, so I'm playing my stance just because of his game. All my grips at the first five minutes was to kind of try to neutralize his attacks. So he wants to get your left leg. Yeah. Yeah. Right there. Yeah. So how hard is that to stop that? I mean, he felt pretty strong coming in some, you know, pushing the head down, trying to play with his balance. Yeah. If you see it? There was a pause. Go back there. He charged in. There's a pause. Me standing in front of him. Yeah. I did that on purpose. What do you mean? Just in front of him? Because, you know, he tried. Yeah. And I'm like, you fail. I'm here. There's a. Okay. So you could feel the frustration. I could feel his frustration. Not be able to take me down. Okay. So now. And this is just psychological battles. And you see me walking straight into the middle of the mat, and he's circling out. Yeah. See, I'm going very slow recovering, and. He'S computing like shit. Yeah. Okay. Because he just made an effort trying to take me down. He needs to recover. And I mean, you need to recover. The other guys there waiting for you. And do I go for another takedown? Cause this one failed. Do I need to recalculate the strategy? Yeah. And he kept trying over and over again and keep failing. I think that frustrated him a lot on that fight. I felt him kind of slowing down on the league because he was getting nowhere. So we're five minutes in. Yeah, he keeps. So you never got that takedown in the. In the early. No. Let's see. So at this point, do you pull guard? Yeah. Okay. So that's when I felt like he's. He's mentally, he's. He's not. He's worried now. Did you try to pull close guard here? No, I knew he was gonna bring Danny in the. Okay. Cause that's the defense against pulling close guard. Yeah, but I like that. What do you. I like people bringing the knee between my legs. Cause, see, I'm gonna close my guard even with his legging. Okay. He's stopping the CLo. Well, this is awkward, but I was holding his arm. That's why he felt he had no hand to post. Got it. But still, it puts a leg in. But you're able to close your guard around. Is you're okay with that? I do that really well. I sweep people from that position a lot. What's the sweep? I guess it's just pushed. Okay. It's just a push, like, to your left side? Yeah. Okay. Because he has no. Oh, it's almost like. You mean you're basically around his back a little bit. Drag situation. He knew that. Like, I swapped a lot of people with that sweep. So you see he kept leaning to his left. To my right. Yeah. So I want to push them to my left. So you see him leaning over to my right a lot. What's the right answer for him to, like, roll or something. No, I mean, he's stuck. He does not really. He's stuck there. But the one thing he did, he kept off me completely. See that? He's leaning like he's too afraid of my attack now because he should lean on me. You know, you should bring the fight to me. So when I felt him, you know, like, I knew he was like, he's too worried about my attacks now. Oh, yeah, that's right. So he can't. Yeah, if he comes back to the center, he has no. So he's not engaging at that time. He's 100% just defending. So I felt that I'm like, he doesn't want to engage and he's looking. I knew at that point he wants my foot. Cause our first fight, I had the same position. I wasn't holding his arm, and he went to attack my foot, which he did. You know, he got into like a toehold or what. Okay. Yeah. So I know he's looking at my foot. Which foot? Sorry, the left foot. My right. Yeah, my right foot. Okay. I'm holding his arm. And now you're going to the back as an arm drag type of thing. So the moment that I came off, now I'm holding his arm so he cannot come up. So, you know, I'm holding his left arm so he cannot post a hand on the floor and come up. And he's holding your right to try to get you. Yeah, basically to prevent you from attacking. Yeah. Oh, that's an interesting. And he rolls. Yeah, he tried to, he tried to get me off balance. So see, now I'm switching. I switched the grip on his arm so I can free my left arm. Can I ask you a question? Like, was there a chance he sweeps you here? I mean, there's always a chance, but very hard. Yeah, but see, my left arm is free. Oh, so you can post. Yeah. Why was your left arm free? Oh, cuz you're using you two. Got it, got it. Okay, now I tried the hook. Now you will see you still got your own. What? Yeah, but when I knew he's his panicking because he didn't move that, he completely opened himself up. Like I'm holding his left arm. So by holding their arm, he's. That prevents him from defending the hook on that side because his arm is being held across. So the arm cannot block the hook. And I mean the hook with your left leg. Yeah. So you see when he come up. But I would say, I mean, that's my guess. But bushish is he's a big guy, you know, he was like 110 kilos. 112, something like that, which is 245. Yeah. Right. Yeah. So what were you at the time? Less. 220. Yeah, 220. A nice, slim 100 kilo. Okay. Yeah. So, you know, his defense are not amazing. He's good, but, you know, he's not known to have amazing defense. So by being the big guy in the room, when you train, you used to get out of situations because of your size. You shake people off. You know, it's because of your size. You shake them off. You get off some bad positions, you can. I mean, I could feel on the first fight, I'm side control, you know, suddenly he explode out. So, you know, you. I've seen him doing that a few of his fights. No, not in the most technical way. Just, I'm getting out. And he did because of his size, so. And he did the same thing. Like he tried to stood up. When I'm on his back, he completely opened up the hooks. He will see the next move. His head gonna come up and he gonna try to get off the floor. So basically come up, shake you off kind of strategy. There was no difference for the hooks. I put both hooks in straight away. Oh, his arm is. Yeah, I'm off balance. Yeah, see, I didn't bring him up. He came up. Yeah. And now I'm attacking his neck and he's worried about the hooks. That's fatal mistake. That's like defense always come first. Remember what I just said now, defense first came second. So he's not worried more about the points than his neck. So it was like a progression of mistakes. That's why I think he got frustrated when he couldn't take me down. And then when I pull guard, he was, he was frustrated that the fight wasn't going his way. You know, he's very good about taking down. He tried over and over again for five minutes. And here he was frustrated about the hooks. So he's like, it's almost like the frustration. Things like, no, no, these hooks shouldn't be here. Like, I pull guard on the grips that I want. He's not comfortable inside my guard. He's not in the position that he wants to be. He's overleaning to his left. You know, he's not engaging or trying to pass. He's trying to get the foot, but his arm is trapped. He's gonna get nowhere. And then when I swapped him, suddenly his words are collapsing. You know, he couldn't take me down. I pulled out Armstrong. He tried to roll me over. No, he didn't get me anywhere. The first movement that he tried to escape, I'm on his back. I mean, now he's lost. Yeah, that if you just go back to him standing up. See, both hook goes in no defense. Like, there was nothing on the way of those hooks because he tried to come up. He's coming up. You're high enough on him to where the weight was just probably immense. It just felt too heavy. And you're already going for the choke. Of course. There's no time to lose. Look at that. Yeah. So you're not, like, worried I'm gonna get shaken off. You're going for the chip. You got your right hand. No. Shaking me off. I'm on your back. Now. We're in this together, and your right hand is opening up the lapel. My right hand is holding his arm. I still holding the sleeve. Oh, sorry. You're holding the sleeve, but holding the sleeve. And I'm already going for the neck because it's timing. At which point do you let go of the sleeve and open up, help with the lapel, or do you not need it? No, I did that. But first I want to try to make a grip. Like, then I need to establish control before I let go, his arm got it. So I kept holding that a bit longer, and then when I fell. Okay. I have a good control over the back. Then I let go. Do you? Okay, so you have, like, a light grip on his lapel, but you're thinking. You know, I need to adjust that. You need to adjust. You're, like, holding it there, and you're thinking, okay, at some point, I need to adjust. All I need. All I want is to get under his chin. Then I know. I mean, it's. Now I can go for it. Cause if it's over, there's no choke. Right. I need. The wrist needs to be under. Can you choke bushes over the. No, I can't. That's just not right. Okay. Anyway, it's not right or it doesn't work? Both. It's not right and doesn't work. I mean, would you tap to a choke on your chin? No, just pressure. You hurt, but it's not gonna choke you out. I don't know. I don't know. I'm not. Let me argue this. I love this. Arguing with Hodgka, Gracie about jokes. This is great. Okay. Like, clock choke. It was always interesting to me. Cause in judo, it's illegal to have the gear on face. And so it was kind of liberating for me to be allowed to have a gear on the face. No, it's just liberating. No, you don't have to worry about it. Of course, it's more effective to go under the chin, but I'm surprised just because the amount of pressure, it's all. About how much you can take it. You can take a lot, but it feels like. No, it doesn't feel comfortable. I mean, sometimes on your mouth, it cuts your mouth. Now you bleeding. It feels horrible. No, but that's not the feeling. The feeling. It might not be a joke, but the feeling, like it's a pressure that. Everything'S just closing in, but it doesn't take you anywhere. Like, you're not gonna go to sleep. You might not go to sleep. So it's just pressure. Yes. So pressure. It hurts, is uncomfortable, but it's not gonna break your face, and it's not gonna put you to sleep. So if I don't get the neck, I don't go for the kill. Okay. I'm like. I'm holding his collar. You know, my wrist is almost under. It's. You know, I'm trying to kind of dig in. Got it. If I can dig in, then I will adjust the collar. But first I need to dig in. Dig in first, then adjust. Can you do all that with one hand or. No? I did. So you can tighten the choke with just one hand? No, I need the second one to open the lapel. To open the lapel. But you're, like, digging in with one hand? I'm digging in under the chin. Under the chin? Under his under. Now I need to go deeper. But that the going deeper requires the second hand. He does. Okay. It does. But that requires you letting go of the other hand. Yeah, I have to let go eventually. Yeah. See? All right, yeah. Well, that's over. Yeah, because I'm already under his. Like, the first hand got under ditching. Do you need the hand and the second lapel? Of course. Otherwise, he turns and he's out. That's the control of the turning versus the tightening of the choke. Yeah, it does both. It helps tighten the collar and stop the person rolling out. Were you feeling pretty good about this position? Yes, I just felt it's getting tighter, tighter, tighter, tighter. Because it wasn't super tight from the beginning. It wasn't, like, the perfect choke. So we're still. I mean, I knew it was like, it's very close to the end, but, you know, I still need the. Just there was still the risk of maybe escaping. Is it possible for his head to slip out? Possible, yes. But I'm closing that gap. Yeah, I hear. What did that feel like? Relief. Relief. Like, awesome. Amazing. Somebody on Reddit asked, ask him about the cross grip he used to sweep, followed with a genius grip switch when Buchesha was inverted. Did you use a cross grip when you sweep? Did you? I guess the cross grip in the arm. That must be. Oh, that's the cross grip. Okay. What's the genius behind that? Or was that just, do you like that kind of. That kind of grip? Yeah, because I always like close guard, and no one wants to be in anyone's close guard, right? It's open guard. It's step to pass. So everybody, when you try to close the guard, they bring the knee in the middle. Like, if you. If. If you're not standing, if you lower on the ground and they open guard, if you're close to me, you need that knee between. So it is a must. That's when I start developing the attack. You know, I managed to have long legs to close my legs around people, even with that, and then I just developed that sweep. When did you start developing that? Like, I don't remember when, but I would say before black belt. Okay, so your answer to that is not to figure out how to prevent them from putting the knee in. Is there an answer to that? No. The good guys will always, no, you can't get the knee, remove that leg out of the way. That's not possible. Well, maybe off balance them enough to where there's not. No. Okay. I mean, you can try, but, like, it's hard. If you cannot balance, you sweep them. Right. So that means gonna. So you have to sweep. That's a full sweep. Yeah, because that's extremely common to have that. I mean, I. If I'm on your guard, open guard, you know, if you have your legs, if I'm between both of your legs in the open guard, my knee will be between your legs because it's a must. My knee cannot be on the floor. Since Hanzo was there. What did he tell you before? I think just motivate you. I think that Hanzo always did that fantastically well to motivate me. Like, before I fight a match, I think that, you know, the confidence, you know, his, you know, his energy being around you, it's. I think that's the. Is the great thing. To have hands on your corner is the motivation that he gives you. What did you learn about Jiu jitsu in life from Hansel Gracie? We got to hang out with him in Vegas a little bit. He's a character. He's one of the historic coaches and jiu jitsu competitors, but also personalities in the martial arts world, in the world in general. There's very few like him. Hans is a fantastic person. It's, you know, what I've learned most from him is, like, you can't take any challenge. It doesn't matter when, wherever, who. It's, you know, you have to be ready. And, you know, with that war spirit that he has, you know, he always took any challenge, ready or not ready. Was it you that said it or he said it? Where? Not until you go in, you know, to do something difficult, do you discover the strength that you have. So, like, if you really think about it, you might think that you're not good enough. You don't have the strength to take on something difficult. I fully agree. I think we are measured not when we're on the strongest, but when we are on the weakest. That's when we truly measure ourselves or character, who we are not. We're in a position of power when we're in a position of weakness. Have you surprised yourself, like, how damn good you are? Like, is this. Is this really how good I am in this situation where in retrospect, you might think, how the hell was I able to accomplish this? Not how good I am, because otherwise I wouldn't be there. So, you know, being there in the first place, it's already not a great thing. But I say, you know, every single time I found myself there, I was super proud that I've never cracked. Like, I've never gave up, ever, any second, any fight, never. Never been broken in competition. Never even. It's not about winning or losing. It's about you giving up. I've never doubted myself. I always fought to the very end, always, that I'm most proud of, because there was moments, you know, it's. You're in a terrible position. You know, mainly, like, there was moments that I was super tired, but, like, exhaustive tired, when it was easy to give up, like, I had nothing more to give, but I pushed. I took energy out of my soul, I would have to say. Cause when my body had zero, you know, my spirit, my soul, pull it out. Is that in part, just not allowing yourself to have to ever, ever quit? Yeah. I have one other thing I regret. I remember, like, a blue belt match, I remember. I'm not gonna say who it was against, but I remember just being extremely exhausted and just constantly fighting. A guy was really good mount, really good guard passing, and I just remembered him passing my guard eventually towards this, like a finals of one of the IBGF tournaments and then right away going to mount and just, I don't know, I, the level of frustration. I mean, I quit at that point. I remember that still, like, I, it's not about losing, winning or losing, but I just remember I was like, I was like teary eyed frustrated. And then I knew there was a lot of fights still left, even in there somewhere. And I quit. And I regret that to this day. I think the reason I regret that is because it gave me an option to now quit. In every other aspect of life, this is an option. Yeah, it is. It sucks. Yeah. It teaches you, you know, it makes us stronger. I think it made you stronger. Yeah. It makes you stronger that you did that to learn that. Don't do that again. But still, like you said, just going to sleep in training. I do think it made me weaker. It did make me weaker in the rest of my life, too. Those, you know, I've quit a few times in my life on small things and you realize, okay, it's not that big of a deal. It's fine. Like, who cares? But that, what you learn over time is that voice always comes there. Obviously. Maybe it does for you, too, even at the highest level of, like, it's not that big of a deal. Like, it's okay to quit here. Like, it makes sense. Everybody would understand, you know, in some sense, like, you're, you know, many people would say you're past your prime in this match with the progestia. Like, it makes sense. You've been focusing on MMA. Makes sense. Makes sense to lose. Yeah, I don't know. That's a weird voice. And in some sense it's that voice. And a voice that says, like, why are you doing this? Like, this is silly. Doesn't make any sense. It's just stop. Just stop. Just stop. And shutting that voice down and never allowing yourself to quit, that's a really powerful thing. Like everybody I've met, everybody that's successful. Yeah. Down to the. Even engineers, CEO's Elon Musk. Just never quitting. Like when everybody around you, it says quit. Never quitting. It's weird. I don't know what that is. Might be genetic. It might be like using the stubbornness to just never allow yourself to develop that. Basically developing a calluses to that voice that tries to tell you to quit. You never quit. Huh? What would you attribute that to? It's like how much you want to get to the destination you chose. Like, you know, it's how badly you want to get there. It's. If you quit, you're never gonna get there. And you always wanted to? I always wanted to. Is there some thing you remember from that match? Some things that happened before and after that stand out to you? Just since in Rio? Yeah, there was an interview, you know, like, prior to the fight, there was a big fight. We were doing, like, media every day before, me and him. We were meeting for media, and, like, five days before, you know, five, six days before. I'm quite chatty. It's, you know, the closer we get to the fight, the more focus I get, the less I stop joke around playing, you know, with people. But I remember, I think it was maybe three or four days before we were doing an interview together. I think my cousin Kira was there. She was doing one of the interviews with us, and I don't remember exactly what we were talking about, but I just remember we were talking about the fight, of course, and then it was standing beside each other, and I'm like. And then suddenly I chopped, and I grabbed him by the neck. I said, well, I'm gonna tap YoU by the neck. And then he's like, you know, very shy. And then I let go. I said, no, I'm gonna tap YoU by the arm. And I could FeEL he was, like he wasn't comfortable, you know, with being there. It always, you know, me saying that I'm gonna tap him out there was, like, I was so relaxed joking ABOut it, but I'm joking that I'm gonna tap him out in a fight that we're gonna have in four days time. And, yeah, I felt he was, like, not comfortable at all. Do you think you got in his head a little bit? It gave you a little bit of confidence? Yeah. You said that Jiu jitsu is a reflection of your personality. So both your Jiu jitsu and your personality, there's a calmness. What is that? Why are you so calm? Is there, like, an ocean underneath that's boiling? Is this developed, or is this your personality? Are you basically leveraging who you are already to develop a game around the Jiu jitsu, or did Jiu jitsu make you calm? I think both. I was always very calm since I was a kid, since very young. I was never very fiery person. So that is a reflection. It reflected on my juju. So my life, on my fights, the way I fight. So it's a direct influence of my personality, and I think it's also in the day, you know, you develop, the more you practice, the more you fight. It's like, you know, you don't want to get nervous. You don't want the adrenaline. And so you just learn how to shut that off from your mind. So the less I thought about it, you know, it's like how many times I fought, you know, let's say the week before the fight, that's when you start more, when you concern the most, because now it's getting very close. Before it's just far away. You know, it's. It's normal to think of the tournament. You get a bit nervous, but it goes away quick. But the fight, you know, the week before now you're constantly thinking of that day. And every time you think adrenaline pumps in, your heart accelerate. You know, it doesn't. You know, it makes it. It's like, why am I feeling this? What difference will it make? So you kind of. You're shutting that thought out of your mind because you don't want to feel the adrenaline, your heart accelerating. It's not going to add you anything. So it's, you know, it's the practice also that I think it helped me to shut that off my mind. Has that helped you in regular life? Yeah, of course. It's, you know, suddenly when you go into any situation that might be stressful, you know, like an important meeting. No, super. Whatever it is, it's like, how much would you worry about that before? Worry is not going to help you anywhere. It's the opposite. Just going to make you more nervous. Your heart rate accelerate. Your ability to think clearly is going to be damaged by that. So it's like the more calm, the more relaxed you are, the better you can think of. Do you ever get angry? Yeah, like in traffic. Do you ever get, like, not calm, just like you're screaming? Not. Not in a screaming sit? No, but just angry. What does angry look like? Is it still calm? Yeah, like, you know, a few seconds of complaining, but then it goes away. Have you ever, like, thrown a cell phone at a wall or something like that? No, I never get that angry because that's just silly. It's like, it's. It's. If I would have done that, I would not be able to control my emotions prior to a fight. That would be a reflection. Letting yourself lose, losing control, that will reflect other times. Do you think it has, in part, made you more emotionally closed off from the world? It's harder for you to be vulnerable. To others, probably, yeah. But I heard there are few times I'm emotionally close. Yeah, maybe. I think that influenced it. Yeah. Have you ever cried in a movie? Yeah. For, not for many years before. I think maybe I'm getting older. Do you remember the movie something? I mean, it's, no, I mean, is it the notebook? I mean, I would say the last few years I've been crying more than before for some reason. I don't know why. Like, silly movies, like nothing suddenly brings tears to my eyes. Yeah, well, I've already, just having met you and interacted with you, I can see that you're kind of opening your heart and mind to the world. You could see like, here's this historically great athlete now. Like, the wars have been fought and you're now, like, waking up to the world. It's cool to see probably I'm bringing my guard down now. I don't have to get up on it. You can even do some podcasts. You said you watched, like, movies beforehand sometimes mentioned Braveheart. What were you doing? Did you watch something beforehand, like the day before? I used to, yeah. There was like, I think Braveheart and Gladiator. I mean, there's a few others that I've always watched the day before. Cause the day before is to do nothing. I just want to be at home in bed watching tv, like saving energy, stretching by myself. So it's like, it's just want to save energy. I don't waste my energy going out, going around. So, you know, those are the movies that I always like to watch. Kind of trying to bring some, you know, hyper excitement. Like, you know, I'm getting ready tomorrow. So I'm like, let me watch some movies that, like, brought, you know, some, that warrior spirit into me? Yeah. What is that about human nature? Braveheart I love even more. Should you put your life on the line for a thing that matters or run away just so you can live? It's like running. You may live, but like years from now, when you look back at this moment, would you trade all the days just to come back to this moment. And tell the English, you could take. Our lives, but you can't take our freedom? I mean, oh, man, what is that about human nature? Is there some aspect of, like, the glory you were able to achieve being more important than anything else? There's some aspect of that, that's greatness. Yeah, I never pursue glory, so it just came, it came with it, but that was never my goal. I never care for glory. Were you able to experience, like, like, I'm at the height of this thing, whatever, whatever humanity is able to achieve in various things. Holy shit, I'm flying. I felt like no, one can touch me. I can destroy people. Yeah. Prolonged periods of time or just momentarily. I always knew from before I got to a black belt I can be great because I used to train with the best in the world for many years and I used to see my progression and everybody else. So I knew I was getting somewhere. I knew I could be the best and that was also my goal since very, very young. And I always believed that I could be. And that over the years that kept telling me over and over again because I'm getting better and better faster than everybody else, so I just need to carry on with what I'm doing. But I think you've said that you wanted to and maybe you thought you could be the greatest of all time. Like at the very beginning, like when you sucked. Yeah, yeah. Not the greatest of all time because I never really thought about that, but I thought, I'm gonna be the best in the world when I sucked. When I sucked. So, okay, so what is that? What is that like, that self belief? Is there a component to that self belief being a prerequisite? It's difficult to say because that was a decision, I think, like, why did I believe I could be? I can't tell you that because I don't know. But you think you decided to be? I decided to be. I decided to be and I believed I could. You think there was like a day somewhere when you were young where you're like, huh, you're sitting on a couch eating cheetos. I don't think it was a day like a moment because for many years is I wasn't really training much as a child, you know, I've done a bit of. I used to train and then stop, done a bit of judo. Never stay away from it much. But until, you know, like from ten to 14, I barely trained jiu jitsu so much. I used to. There was no Gracie school near where I used to live. And I was doing. There was a judo school. I used to go twice a week. I went to Judy's tournament. I lost in 5 seconds, left crying. The guy pulled me in 5 seconds. Anyway, so when I was 14 I went to the south of Brazil to see my uncle Helen to spend summer holidays. I was there for like four weeks, I think. And when I got there, my cousin Hollis were living with him. Hollis, like bigger than me. It was. I think it's four years, four years older. So I was 14, I was already 18. 1718 purple belt competitor and I think that was the first time in my life that I felt what it mean what it meant to be a gracie in terms of having a school, teaching, training, you know, living that, you know, jujitsu lifestyle, what a gracie meant to be. And I've just, I've loved that. I was out of shape. My uncle was like, you know, incentivizing me to lose weight to train. But you're not training. Why? You know, it's like you've got a shape, you need to diet. So I used to run every day. I was eating super well. I start, you know, I start that when I start changing. So when I go back to Rio, I was super motivated to follow up, carry on. And he, you know, he invited me to go back there to live with him, but I couldn't. It was too soon to change schools and everything. My mom said no, but maybe next year, if you want to go, you can. So I kept that in my mind. Next year I moved to the south to live with him. I was 15 and it was him. My uncle Helen and my uncle Carlin. They both used to live very close to each other. They also have their own schools close to each other. So I was with both and I stayed there for almost a year. You know, I was the youngest in the academy. There was some, you know, blue, purple bells, normal guys, but they're already competing, training ahead of me. And I just joined the group of training that didn't compete while I was there because there was no competition that then and I wasn't really ready. But it's not about competing, it's more about the training. And I start training every day, start improving. And a year after that, when I came back to Rio, I was already on a mission. I was like, I love this. I'm just carry on training every day with my uncle Carlos, Carlos Gracie Junior, Gracie Baja. And when I got there, I was training a little bit there before, but just 1415. But when I got there, there was a, you know, there was one of, that was one of the most competitors, one of the biggest jujitsu schools at the time. There were so many high level world champions, competitors in every single belt. And I've kind of joined in with that and I've carried on. I don't remember when, but I remember, you know, looking and saying, I'm gonna be the best in the world. But I used to be. I was at the bottom of the stairs, you know, no one really believed me. I didn't shout, you know, to disguise, but, you know, I told a few people, I'm like, I'm gonna be the best. And that's. I think I was just losing. But I've never ever doubt, I've never diverted from that mission. I would say, did anyone believe you when you said you can be great? Nobody. Didn't matter. Didn't matter. I don't care. I don't need even people that, like, love you. Everybody. My mom, my dad. I mean, no one thought, no one in my family thought I was gonna be here today. Nobody. Because I just started late. I've never had any start that people. Oh, that kid's gonna be really good. You know, I was a chubby kid that didn't barely train. I mean, people used to look at me, he just another grace. He does, you know? Well, more. What do you learn from that? Do you think most people lose that self belief they quit when everyone around them doesn't believe? Yeah. I think if those that need approval. Yes, I see. You shouldn't have approval. I never need approval from anyone. I don't care if you leave me or not. If you. Not my problem. It's tough. It's tough. I don't need approval. But you're surrounded by people older, wiser, better than you. And they're kind of directly or indirectly saying, you stop being silly, kid. No, no one ever told me that because I. That was not something that I used to say all the time. I maybe said very, very few times. I just thought, you know, maybe that's the secret. Of course. I mean, if you start shouting, then you're just being silly. Then it's not what you really want. Then you're saying that for other reasons. If you say it over and over again. Because you shouldn't. I mean, why? Well, to push back. One of the reasons you might want to say it is to find the right people that believe in you. Yeah, but not if you say over and over again. Then it's just. Then you're just bragging. Sure, because one thing is to say it, but the other one is to do it. So it's, you know, you said it once or very few times, but now you have to do it. Saying it's not helping you. Getting there. Was there sacrifices you had to make? Everything, everything. That was my priority in life. Everything was secondary. Like social life, career paths, everything. And from 14, 1516, as you get better and better and better and better, it was just becoming sharper, the focus on this thing. Yeah, it's just over and over again, over and over again. It's, you know, it's just training, training, training. And I mean, how many times I lost I have no clue. So on the mat, you were getting beat up. I'm getting smashed by everybody. People my age, I was chubby. I was physically weak. I mean, I'm tall, but physically, I'm nothing physically strong. I'm normally strong for my size, but physically, if you want to measure strength, I'm weak because, you know, we can measure strength. Lifting weights. I'm weak. I don't lift. I lift weight same as people much lighter than me. Everybody, my weight lifts heavier weight. And people that train with you often. Talk about how strong they're super strong. Yeah. Because I generate a lot of strengthen I can create. I put myself in the right angles so that I can be strong. I'm not strong. And the only person who I listen to saying that is comprito one guy that I fought, Rodrigo Madeiros, I fought him a few times, and he's the only one that I heard saying about me that's like, no, Roger's not strong. He's not. He's technical, and he can create strength, but he's not strong. He meant that as a compliment. Yeah, I think so. No, I think he was honest, because I think he's the only one who could see that. Yes. So I think that's a compliment. So he's technically really strong. So you had an incredible match with him. Yeah. Is there insight you have about how you went from a person who was not very good but had a dream, a confident dream, a vision, to somebody that was actually good? Was there something to the practice sessions? Were you getting reps on a specific techniques? I'd never done anything special because, I mean, I'm in a gym training equally with everybody else, so I've never did anything on the side different than anybody else. So, you know, I was in the school training exactly the same way as everybody else. Wow. In terms of schedule, yes. But what was. Can you reverse engineer what was going through your mind? Cause there's so many different ways to actually mentally approach the same exact training session. I'm gonna try to beat you. Okay. So in SOME part, it's competitive. Like, at the core of it is I want to be better than these particular people. You're gonna keep beating me, I'm gonna keep coming back at you. And to do that, I have to solve problems. I have to figure out how to do stuff. Well, you catch me once, I'm gonna keep on coming, trying to not get caught on that. At which point did you develop a game that was basically the famous white belt game of the very basics the very fundamentals of jiu jitsu, like saying, I'm going to beat you. Never. There was never a conscious decision to try to have a basic juju first. I think there's a big misconception. There's misconception. My jujitsu is not basic. It's a hodgepaccuracy. It's not basic. It's not old school. I think people, they Just DOn't see that. It's extremely complex in a way that is, people, they cannot copy. I teach people, I can teach you the cross color joke, but the one thing that people, they don't realize is not the move is you need to practice the move until you learn. Is the practice over and over again. Like, it took me years. When I say years, I'm like, years after I was a black belt, I was able to choke people out with a cross color, choke in them out effectively years after I got my black belt. So that's something that you learn first day, first week, so I can teach you. It makes no difference. You know the theory, but until you apply the enum, you help you. Of course, the more details you learn, you know, the more tools you have to practice. But it's still very complex because it's not about the move itself. It's about how can you control the movement of the other person. He's resisting, you're blocking, you cannot predict what he would do. And he's doing a whole bunch of moves to block you. Every single move you do a step of the way, because it's a progression of move from beginning to end till I apply the choke. It's a progression of move. And there's not one way to get that. There's many ways, because how many ways can you block? You can put your arm in every single angle. We have both arms you can bridge. So it's dealing with all that. That is the complexity of the position, but that goes for everything. Like, every single move, my strong moves, I would say it took me years developing them, years. So it's. And you're going to tell me that's basic, so go try and do it. What the other person is defending, that's the thing, because most of the things that I do, I've been doing them for years and they know that I'm going to do, and I can still get it. Most of the times that's the hardest is when they know what's coming and you can still do it. And you said that the way you're able to do that, you just have to do it right. Yeah. What do you learn by doing all the steps along the way? And just for people who don't know, cross collar choke from the mount. So jiu jitsu starts in a neutral place. There's people on their feet, and then you either, then you get to the ground somehow, and then there's the person on top and on bottom. Then there's a guard with the legs between the two people. And then you can get past the guard. As you get past the guard and you into side control and so on, you get more and more and more dominant positions. And so Mount is considered to be one of the most dominant positions. It's when you're past their legs sitting on top of their stomach, putting pressure on them, and cross collar choke is using their jacket to. How would you explain that to choke? To have the collars? I put my both hands on your collars, and when I squeeze, you press your neck so it blocks the venue. You go to sleep. So it's a. You choke people with your hands in your wrist. You put them, you know, you grab the hollow, so you get your wrists around people's neck and you squeeze. Yeah. The discovery of that is fascinating. I mean, because it's interesting. It's like, you know, you can imagine there's all kinds of ways to choke a human being. What animals do it with their, like, mouth, right? They put, like, their jaws around the. In the fact that you can kind of discover this methodology of the right kind of positioning, and then it becomes an art form, like, of why this? Why not this, right? Or why not this? Or something? Like, to figure out, I think we. Practiced that will come easy over time. You figure out what works and what not you. And then, and then more further and further details and subtleties start to emerge anyway on that process of beating, of being able to beat some of the best people in the world and the thing they know is coming. What is. What's the difference between the white belt doing that and Hadro Gracie doing that? The thing that's so hard to explain, what do you think you're picking up? Is it some tiny, tiny details of muscle movements? It is. It's many tiny details because it's the whole movement itself is the perception from beginning to end. Like every step of that movement, it's important and precise. So it's, you know, you miss one detail on the way, you collapse. So when I say that with the black belt, the black belt has no control over the whole movement, he's thinking beginning and end. So he goes straight you know, straight to your neck. Regardless, he cannot read the other person. If it's, you know, if it's time to let go, if it's the time to go for a neck, should I be pushing here before I get my hand in? You know, is this the right time to go deep, or should I deal with this first before the second hand? That's at the beginning, since the white belt. At the very beginning of the journey. Yeah, the white belt. Did you think finished. Yeah. And then as you get progress, you see that there's, like, this giant tree of possibilities that you're almost feeling your way down. I mean, would you be able to teach expl. Do you even know what you're doing by the details? Okay, but it's hard to convert into words, probably. No, it's possible. Then you don't know what you're doing. So what is. What are some most important details that you could say? Maybe positioning of the hand, the gripping. Is it the positioning of your body, the posture? Is there some interesting, like, insights is. A combination because first you have to put your body in a very strong position that you don't require your hands to hold them out. So the choke is. That's first, because I cannot use my hands on the floor to stop you escaping. Yeah. So if I have to, my body has to handle that the way I position myself. I have to do it in a way that don't require my hands for balance. Okay. Why is the mouth such a dominant position? Doesn't make any sense. Right. Like, you're just sitting on top of the stomach of a person. It makes all sense if you think what's. Forget fighting, forget jujitsu. Like you've never trained. What's the one position, the most dominant position you can get over another human being? One the most for you. Which one? It is like the most dominant position that you can get over another human being. So if we were just. Because the way I think about it is putting myself in, like, a six, seven, eight year old self without knowing any martial arts. And I had an older brother who'd beat the shit out of me. Yeah, it probably was Mao, but. Well, yes. Okay, so we both didn't know, but if we knew something, it'd probably be back control. If in the back control, you're under the other person, do you think being under is the most dominant position? It can be over another person. You mean like a back control? If I'm on your back. Oh, like that. You can move, you can roll. I cannot stop you rolling. Yeah, maybe you can even stand up. How dominant is that? Yeah, but if we're the same size, both untrained, if it doesn't matter. Have you seen kids? Do they do that? Okay. Mount looks and feels like dominance when you're two eight year olds fighting. Okay. I don't know. I don't know why it feels that way. It could be some animalistic thing. Maybe it is actual dominance. I don't know. But it feels like if you're untrained, you can just buck your way out of it. It feels unstable. It feels unstable to hold mouth unless you know what you're doing, right? No. If you want to put both of your hands on the floor. Yeah, just. Just your hands. Do you think it's easy to take somebody off? Yeah, maybe not. Do you think it's easy to remove the hand and bring them out? The hands on the floor, arms straight. I'm leaning, and. Yeah, you're right. It's hard. I mean, you don't need to know fighting to hold yourself down. Yeah, but you're right. When you take the arms off and balancing, then it gets tricky, because when you're trying to. I think what happens? I'm thinking back to eight year old, because my brother's five years older than me, and he would do the usual, like, stop hitting yourself thing, and I think he would be in mount, like, hitting me with my own hands at a place of love. Of course, I love him deeply, and it was very formative and positive experience for me. Okay. I think, yeah. The weakness is when he takes, when the person who has you, mount, takes their arms off to do something. But even if you keep your hands up in the air. When I'm falling. Yeah, you can when I'm falling. So I'm speaking about untrained people. I feel like they get greedy. They try to do stuff. The other day, I watched my nine year old daughter. Yeah. We're in a friend's house. There's a whole bunch of kids there. They playing. And when I looked, she's mounting a boy her age, her size. He cannot escape. Wow. She probably seen. No, she trains. She's been training for, I would say, a year and a half, which is not much. I mean, she's a nine year old daughter, a girl over a boy. Has she seen footage of you? Maybe she picked up? No, but she'd been training for a year and a half, so she has an idea what mount is. But, I mean, in terms of our skills, I never taught her them out. She had lessons at the academy, like any other kid. Did she make him cry or. No, but he couldn't escape. Which other position would she be able to hold? The boy in the back? He would roll her out. That's true. He couldn't come out from underneath her. They're kids. Like, there is no other most dominant position that you can pin the other person. Couldn't you argue from that perspective? Side control? No, no, because side control, you have to hold the other person, and it's. You're not free. You cannot release them. But in side control, your hips are not on top of theirs. So they can't buck you off. Right. If you're holding them a little bit and you can hit them with one hand, his head is here. You're gonna hurt him here by the time you're doing that. But then he has his arms free. And if he turn towards your legs, then he's away from your arms. He not even has the perfect angle. I mean, it is a good position. You can hit, you can dominate. But it's not the best position to be over the other person. He can knee you in the head at the same time. You punch him. Then there's a knee coming to your head. I love playing devil's advocate with Hodge, Gracie, about two eight year olds fighting. And your head is closer to his hand. Yeah, maybe he can throw you a punch. All right. Would you choose to be inside control of a mount, getting in the head? Well, for a person who, in competition prefers neon belly over a mount. But that's my weakness. That's my failure as a human being. Holding mount can be tricky. It's very hard. Of course it's hard. But what is easy? Tell me how easy? Side control and neon belly is easier. But neon belly is easy. Easier? I'm not saying black belt level. I'm saying, well, maybe even black belt level. Easier for what? To hold somebody? To make them squirm and hurt. To create openings. Never go to death with a big guy. Yeah, you can. You can't. Yeah, he's gonna push you back and come up in the mount. He can't sit up, not when he mounted him. The thing is also about Mount is people on the bottom of Mount panic more so they fight harder. They panic, they expose. It's the most exposure you have because the person's arms are free. You cannot touch him. His head is too high. There's nothing he can do. His legs won't get you anywhere. He might touch your lower back. It's like nothing you do. You most exposed being in the mouth. I'd rather you hold me. Side control. A thousand times the mount of me and having to look up for your fist coming down. Yeah, side control. I hug you, you cannot hurt me. Okay, hold me, but I'm hugging you. If I hug you tight, what can you do against me? Hold. It seems maybe it's just from. And again, I'm arguing just for the fun of it, but it seems like a more difficult skill to learn to apply a huge amount of pressure and weight from mount. You don't have to apply pressure and weight from out. Not apply pressure, but be heavy. Right. You don't necessarily need to be heavy. You don't? No. Why do you, as people say, you feel extremely heavy? If I'm putting, if I'm being heavy, I cannot attack. I have to choose. I can be heavy just to penalize, you know, just to pin them, take the energy out, you know, to make them suffer. But the moment that I decide to attack, I can only be heavy if I'm sitting up straight. That's when my all my weight can drop down. If I'm high, then I'm sitting on your chest and on your own solar plexus. That's the worst position to be. Sit at it on the person because that's where he breathed. So you're in a high mouth, sitting up straight. That's when you can. I can be very heavy. I can make people, you know, feel my weight and, you know, be very uncomfortable, but I'm not in a position to attack. The moment that I want to attack, my body has to lean forward. I have to approach the, you know, the neck or the arms. The moment that I do that, my weight comes off my hips, it goes to my knees. The weight is off you. But at that point, if you have. Now I'm attacking, I'm no longer heavy. On you, but you want to be at that point to remove any of the defenses they have or some of the defenses by getting their elbows. Now I'm like either getting in, trying to get your call, or bringing your elbow across to attack the amlock. So what are some interesting details along the way that are tough to get to figure out? What were the big leaps for you from white belt to the best in the world? It's you're trying to attack the neck, you know, putting one hand in the collar, you prying yourself that hand to place it on the floor. So now you're vulnerable to get bridged, to get rollover, because if your hands are free, trying to roll you over, you're stopped the moment they put your hand in the person's collar. Now, you have to be very careful with your body positioning. Very careful. The distribution of the weight. Yeah. And how, you know, how high you sit, you know how tall your upper body goes. And then the biggest challenge comes as you try the second hand. That's the, you know, for the, for the choke. That's the biggest challenge, the second hand, because you already have, you know, you already don't have one hand. Now you are trying the second hand. And if one of my hand is in you as a defending yourself. Have two hands. One hand is already on one side. This, this side is getting attack. You have two hands blocking that. I have one hand. There's no help for that hand. I cannot remove anything. That's the biggest challenge, getting one hand, getting past two, and not getting rollover. But I also have to have two hands on bottom. I have two hands and can also turn, and I can do all kinds of stuff. Yeah. And my whole mind and everything is focused on that second hand. It's a big challenge. It's hard. Very hard. Is there an art to getting the first hand into a place where you. It's less of an art because it's easier. I'll say. Most times I get my first hand in is when you try some move, you're trying to escape, you're pushing. I get the first hand in as. An opportunity, and it's gonna sit there for a while and now, and I. Go as deep as I can. So the first hand, because the second hand is the hardest, I have to compensate the first hand to be as deep as I can. If I cannot get the first hand in deep, I won't try the second. I need that first hand deep. Then I go for the second, and. It'S deep, and everything is, like, super tight. Super tight. The first hand has to be super tight. Otherwise the chance of failing is very big. Okay. Does the opponent usually feel like they're screwed at that point also? No. As you put in the first hand, and the moment that I position myself just prior to attempt the second hand, I think the way I, my body is positioned, the way I'm collapsing with my weight, and they feel, it's like it's, I'm, you know, this is terrible. Yeah. How long did it take you to figure out how to reposition your weight? Once the first hand is in the. Very quickly because they get breached out. Okay. So that there's a good feedback loop. There because one mistake you out, like, one off, positioning you out but you. Still have to do that against the best people in the world. Yeah. Where is the way out for most people? Like, if you were in mount against prochacia or some of the best defenses in the world. The way out is to. Or the obsolescence to defend themselves and, you know, prevent the first hand to get deep. And I'll say the best thing that they could do is try to change my positioning on the mount in a way that, you know, push me to a very low mount, you know, try to just change the way I'm dominating you not to be, you know, get me off the high mount, pretty much. Are you always, is it a slow, is it a fast thing to go from low to fast mount? A high mount? Slow, very slow. Because I need to beat your arms because you're holding me down and the. Arms need to come out. It's a slow. It's a slow process. Okay. And you just. Is there like a. Yeah, so I use my legs against your arms? Yeah. So it's my legs pushing your arms. But how do you get them? How do you get your legs into the elbows? As long as it's, you know, it has to come under the tip of your elbow because now the legs will start forcing your arms up. So your legs aren't, like, spread out there? No, they're in. Your elbow cannot get inside my leg. That means I'm in a very low amount, and then I cannot attack because I cannot ignore that, because the moment that I attack, that will start pushing my leg to push me up. What's the secret to getting the second hand in? There's two ways. Either you go four fingers inside, which is the hardest, because with the moment that your two hands are defending, you'll be blocking the way. And I cannot clear an attack two hands against one. So I go thumb end, I go behind the ear. So my grip goes. Because for you to defend, you need to get there. And when you get there, you elevate your elbow, expose the armlock so it's hard. So you put the thumb in, and then there's the dreaded, like the other person just waits for you to loop the arm over. Yeah, but that's over. It's. Once you get the thumb in, it's over. Okay. No, but when I'm there, it's. If I get that because they're bridging, you know, they try. I'm not using their hand to post. Now your head is. My head is very close to the floor when I try to bridge. And, you know, my forehead would touch the floor. That would be used as a hand. But it's not on the floor. Not necessarily, because if it's on the floor, my body collapse over you. Yeah. So there's no place for my hand for me to work on your neck. So I need some space between us. So I don't completely can bob up and down. Yeah. I try to keep a gap between us. So that pursuit that takes many, many, many years. I don't know if you've seen Jiro dreams of sushi doing the simple thing. That's not so simple, but it kind of looks simple of the over and over and over and over and over, and presumably getting much better simple. It becomes very simple. But you're picking up details probably along the way. There's wisdom along the way. What is that? Is that there's, like, lessons that you just kind of accumulate over time. Like one training sessions, you'll see maybe, like, the positioning of the thumb, like this. Detailed positioning of the thumb or something like this. And then you like, okay, you, like, load that in. They'll be very basic because there is not that many different ways. Maybe one, two. I just do one. Any other is not as strong because it's about getting a strong grip on your collar. I mean, the sun is. It's the thumb goes inside, you know, is it the thumb in or four fingers in? But it's getting a strong grip on the collar. As long as, you kNow, this is just holding and feeling strong. So that's JUst two options. So it's the dynamic stuff along the way. And then some of that is timing, too. It's timinG. Are you also, like, making people, like, faking them out, making them think about something else? No, not at that point there's not, because I cannot fake anything else at that point because I will have to change my positioning to, you kNow, maybe to fake an armlock, then I have to move out from that. So then I will lose that control I have. So what's the process towards mastery? If you were to convert that to something that generalizes beyond Jiu jitsu, how can you get that good at a simple thing, practice and what that simple. The same exact thing over and over. It's just a matter of how long would take you. So all that's true. That's true. I mean, like I said, that's true. Look how long it took me. People give up along the way. There is intricacies to that journey towards perfection. There's a lot of people that do jiu jitsu for decades, and don't get better. No, because they don't train the way they should. They don't train to get better. They train to get tough. There's a big difference. Most people, they train to get tough. So they are tough. You know, like we were talking before, they don't practice the weakness you want to be good at. You want to be really good at jujitsu. You have to practice your weakness, not your strength. You have to practice everything, but you have to be equally strong in every position. They all exactly the same, you know, your guard, top, bottom, side, control, top, bottom, turtle, half guard, mount back. I mean, you pick, take down, it's, and then you get into details of escaping triangle, applying the triangle, escaping armlock, different scenarios of, you know, it's, the one thing is defending the arm lock when, you know, you have your time, your arms very close to your body. The other thing is to defend the arms when your arm is almost getting and then when you got your arm. So there's so many things to practice that you need to repeat them over and over again until you're confident enough that when you get there, you have a chance. And you can do the same kind of thing for even the final stages of a cross choke from mom. Everything. I mean, of course, like, you don't practice escaping the armlock with a full arm straight. And because, you know, it's, that's gone. I mean, you, you practice, you know, you practice escaping the arm lock. When he takes your arm, you have, you know, you have a chance of trying to escape, but you don't practice, you know, okay, take my arm. When I say go, go. I mean, you got, you know, you pop the arm. That is like, you get injured doing that. Escaping the cross call or choke. It's, I mean, escape, not letting the person get there. Yeah, you can escape. You can practice escaping triangles because, you know, it's like, it's, you, you have a way better chance of escaping triangle then. Okay, mount to me. Put both hands in my neck. I mean, it's over, you know, don't be there. What's the best submission in jiu jitsu? A choke, I would say. From which position? If I took a billion dollars to start in a position, like in a submission, and you only get the billion if you get the submission, which one would you start? Cross collar choking them up. Cross collar choking them. Not from the back. No. You have a better chance keeping from the back. Really? Yeah. Even with the hooks? Even with everything. Do you think some people disagree with you? I don't care. I have a better escape. I have a better chance escaping from the back than if you mount me, put my hands on my neck. So I've been that many were facing yourself. And I will give you a billion dollars to escape. You. You would, you would pick from the. Back thousand times over. Like, really no comparison. You have, like with hooks with like a triangle. Doesn't matter. You can do whatever you want. Like a body triangle. Okay. Okay. Like really thousand times over. What? No question. You. The mount is a super controlling position. It's not just because cross collar choke in the mouth. The moment that you put both hands on my neck, you know, you have to. Your arms need to be very close to your body to attack. So that means there's very little space between us. So that means there's very little space for you to work on your escape. And the moment that you cannot bridge. Let's suppose I have. The person has a good mouth, so you cannot bridge them off. What else? You don't have space to try to work on your defense being in the back. I have all the space around me to work on my defense. In my arms, I have the mobility to bring them anywhere. So I. Because of that, it gives you me a much better chance. And you cannot. I can move my body if you my back. You cannot pin me. I cannot take you off my back. First, I need to defended the choke. But you have no control over my body. So that means there's still a lot of movement that I can try to use to escape in the mount. There's no movement. I'm pinned down. I cannot move. And I have no space between us to escape. Well, the argument against that this is great is that on the bottom of mount, I do have my hands between. So you're saying they're pinned. There's nothing between where. I mean, you could get them in theory, you could. Somehow you could, but there's no. You can, but then there's no space. They'll be squeezed between our bodies. If it's an incredible. If it's an incredible mount. No, it does not mount. Like how? Standing. If I put both hands on your neck. If I'm gonna go for the cross collar choke, after I get my hands in, the next step is to pull you close to me. So it's this. My arms needs to be close. There's the hands that could do something. They can come in, but they have very limited space between us. Yes, yes. No, I mean to push your body away to only put standing. Not if your back is against the floor? Sure. Okay. The argument against the mount is, or the argument for back control as being the most dominant position is even though I have hands, I can't really use them effectively as a fact, knowing the. Mount of, there's no space. There's no space. You can try. I mean, you can squeeze your hand in. I mean, there's still things that you could do, but they're so limited. So if you polled the hundred best competitors of all time, what do you think they would answer to that? Do you think most would agree with you? I don't care. It will show me the excuse, the ability to see. Okay, so the perfect mount versus the perfect back control. There's no question. Okay. There's no question for me. I mean, argue with me. Like, show me, because I'm not, I'm not being stubborn, because I'm being, I mean, scientific. So explain it to me why the back you would be harder, it would be better to be a position to finish than mount. If you can explain it to me, why I might change my mind. I was trying to, but I don't have the cred. I'm like a middle school science student trying to talk to Einstein here. Okay. Besides you, who do you think is the greatest jiu jitsu competitor of all time? Can you make the case for some of them? Marcelo Bushesha, Leandro Lowe. I'll have to go with Bushesa, because look at how many titles he has. I mean, he has by far more than Marcelo. Marcelo stopped quite early. Leandelo has eight, but Muchesha is better than him. What do you think makes Bochesho so good? He's a heavyweight that moves like a lightweight. He moves very fast, but he's very agile for his size. So the agility combined with aggression. Yeah. So it's very hard to control him because he moves fast, and he's 112 kilos, 115 sometimes, or 110. I mean, I'm not sure, but he's about, around that. So 240 in pounds. So when you, when you're agile, 240 pounds, that makes it very hard to control you. What about making the case for some others? What about the little guys? What about Marcelo? If you were to make the case for him being the strongest, what makes Marcelo good? Marcelo Garcia is extremely technical. I mean, I think he's one of my favorite jujitsu fighters, because in a technical way, I think he's probably one of the best. His raw technique in a bunch of different positions for submissions, he's not very powerful. You know, physically, he's not very strong, but he can make himself very strong, and his technique is very, very high level. Have you ever trained with him? No, I fought him twice. Yeah, but he's much smaller than me. What happened in those matches? The first fight, I topped him, I. Think, five minutes in which submission. Choke from the back. Collar, choke from the back. And the second time I beat him by points. But a very large, I think, twelve. Two, actually, just to continue. I wonder if John Donahue would agree with you about mountain back. I can't wait to. This is a bear versus lion conversation, but I'm looking. There's statistics about. I'm not letting this go. Uh, there's statistics about. Oh, look at that. Hodger. What do you know? Looking at Hodger Gracie statistics for, um, most successful submissions. Choke from the back. Yeah. Is the most. So. So people panic, scientists, because people panic when I'm out. They turn the back, I choke them out. That's one explanation. But for people, it is interesting that, of course, this doesn't capture, but this captures a lot of your major matches. And we should say that you've submitted most of your opponents, so you rarely win on points. Usually when submissions, choke from back is most of them. Then cross choke from mount. Arm bar is a lot too. So 18 from choke from back. Twelve. Cross choke, ten. Armbar, five. RnC rear naked is for no Gi. Okay. So tells them Ezekiel is very powerful. I took out using a strong weapon. Yeah. Also from out. Also from out. Oh, that's when you can't get the one hand in. No, because the Ezekiel most times I use against people is that is the attack, that as soon as I get to the mount, when they try to escape the open up and I get them, it has to be at that initial timing. So it's not a thing you used to, like, bother them in order to. Either, either I get it right, right away or I don't bother trying much. Because you need to keep one hand behind the head and that you naturally on that position as soon as you mount most of the times. And the moment that you mount someone, no one accept that they go mounted. They're gonna explode to get out. So holding the head, it gives you a better way to dominate them initially, you know, to deal with that explosiveness on the beginning, on the initial, on the beginning. And then. But then you have to let go to try it. You're very limited holding the head in terms of goats. Shanji, I feel like he doesn't get enough credit that he deserves. He had an extremely dominant performance in competition. What about Salo and Shanji Hibero, what are your thoughts about what makes them so good? You had a bunch of tough matches with ashanji. Yeah. And salah eight times. Eight times you fought? Yeah, for eight times. Shande? I fought salo once. What? I think I'm bringing up a sore point. Oh, did Shanji tap when you, or did the time run out and that was the last time you guys faced each other? Yeah. 2008. That was incredible to watch. Also, I think you pulled guard with 1 minute left, working towards attacking. I mean, it's probably very tough to get anything, and for people who don't know, time ran out. You had something that looked like an arm block, and Shanji looked like he may be tapping, but it looked like he might be just celebrating, which is most likely. I'm not sure. I. I'm not sure it was. I'm not sure because I think his arm just, just straight. His arm. Time finish. Yeah. So I'm not sure if it was tapping to, you know, to let go. Time. Time's up. Or because of the outside. Most likely the time was up. Yeah. And also, there's a thing where you start, you realize there's only three, 2 seconds left. He used to kind of start celebrating. You realize that Hadrian's not going to be able to finish the sambar in the time left, so you start celebrating. No, I think he topped to say the time is up. The time is up. Anyway, what do you think? The longevity, especially is impressive with Shanji. How long? I think he doesn't get credit as much as he deserves because he pushed his career very far, and the last few years, he was on his best. So he's. If you would have stopped before, you know, you would, people would remember him on his highest, but he kind of pushed more than his peak, let's say. How hard is it for you to walk away? We'll talk about journey into MMA as well. But you basically, especially with the second match against bushes, basically walked away on top, beating arguably the greatest competitor of all time and just walking away. It wasn't that hard, to be honest, because that was something that I was considering for a while, because the last few years of my career, let's say he was fighting MMA at the same time was fighting Jiu Jitsu, and it was very challenging to do both. Like, I don't. There's not another person who ever did that because the training is a confliction with the way you train. Everybody who start doing MMA start focusing MMA, their jiu jitsu gets worse because they stopped training with the game, everybody, no exception. Was your Jiu Jitsu also getting worse? No, because I made sure I kept training with the guy and I kept fighting at least the world championship once a year. That was my goal. I'm like, I'm gonna go for MMA, but I love Jiu Jitsu and I still wanna fight the highest level. So I kept fighting once a year for a few years. It was a challenge, especially because the two or three times when I competed at the worlds, it was right after MMA fight. I had and no gear. You don't have the grips. So my grips, it made a big difference on my grip, so I was weaker grip wise, so I felt that. So I knew it was like, it's unnecessary risk, because I'm not. If I cannot be 100%, so what am I doing this? But I'm stubborn. I love jujutsu. That's like, I love fighting jujitsu. I never loved mma. I've liked it, but I think if all Greece, I wouldn't done it. So the thing you felt the most is the grips? Yeah. Could you win a guy world championship without gripping? No. Like just pretending it's no gee match. They get to grip you, but you don't? No. So grips are essential. Of course. I mean, how can you choke someone like, it's. If your grips are weak, your forearms will fatigue and then you will have no power, and then you cannot do anything. Yeah. You could still arm lock and you can. So I meant more not for the submission, but for the control of the game of it. But you need to, need to grip to get there. To get there. And if you grip so weak, but. You also have grips in nogi, can she use those grips? No. This is a thought experiment. So like, I'm trying to understand how essential. Get a nogi, gotta go fight with the GiD. They panic. They panic. Of course. Everyone panics. A bear panics when they're in the water with a shark. But that doesn't mean the bear can't still win. When it stops panicking and relaxes, it's not possible. That's another discussion. Can a bear beat a shark in the water? Actually, I need to maybe a polar bear because they're pretty good at swimming. Okay, I say not possible for the no gear guy to win, but the. Bears is a further discussion. What was to you, the biggest difference between mixed martial arts and jujitsu? What are some interesting differences, some interesting insights, even just about the grappling within both sports. So the biggest difference for me between MMA and jujitsu is first, is the speed. Like jujitsu, you know, like a ten minutes match. I can take my time. There's no dangers that forces me to move fast. MMA, you have to be 100% sharp and fast from 1st second of the fight, because punches are coming. You can get knocked out anytime. One mistake, you're out. You still don't have that. I don't have to worry about quick submissions because it's all about the way my body is positioned, my grips. It's easy to avoid. It's easier to see it coming. It's like a quick submission, a surprise. It only works if you make a mistake, if you're not correct positioning. Otherwise, it's impossible. It's extremely difficult. MMA is nothing. I mean, one split second mistake. And when the person comes, you have to respond. You have to match his pace. I mean, you can slow down, but it's like you're forced to respond so much farther. It's a lot more physical, a lot more. And you need to be physical much better. Conditioning faster. It's explosiveness. It's much harder. Is it possible in the MMA to. Calm things down if they change the rules? Yeah, five minute rules. No. Ah, I see. So, like, I just meant, actually, technically speaking, is there ways to. To take an opponent that's being exceptionally aggressive? You can clinch, clinch, but then he takes it down. He keeps moving. Something is hard to control that pace. You can, you don't. If you play defense, you save more energy than if you try to be the aggressor and respond. And even getting to the clinch is very difficult. Yeah, they have no way to hold yourself there. So that was the biggest challenge for me in MMA, is the speed, because I'm a very slow start fighter. If you look at my matches, I start very slow, because if I go hard, you know, I fatigue faster. So for me, that was the hardest part of, is to start fast. What about on the ground? Is there something different, more challenging in the ground? Being in the bottom? Yes. This punches punch coming. How fundamentally different is jujitsu with punches on the ground? Ah, it changes everything. Everything which, which parts? The distance that you allow your opponent to be on you. The techniques that you choose to apply, you know, you have to. Your body has to be aware of the punches, and you are a lot more limited on your attacks. So you're known for your closed guards. How does your closed guard have to adjust? How does the positioning of your hands have to adjust when you're on the bottom of close guard? So in the guard, especially in the closed guard, you have to keep the person very close to you, or you have to kick him away. That's the guard is either I'm hugging you or get away from me. And in Jiu jitsu, you're allowed to have a middle. Yeah, Jiu jitsu, there's a lot you can allow the person to be. What about getting armlock or triangle submissions from the guard? Is that fundamentally different? Because you don't have the middle game? It's much harder. There's barely no open guard in MMA. Very little. Because the open guard, there's a distance between you and him. Yeah. There's a distance you cannot control. It's much harder to control that punch coming, and I have to position myself a way to block that, and it limited my attacks, my options of attacks. Is there a reason, correct me if I'm wrong, but I don't think you do open guard much in Jiu jitsu. In no Gi, is there a reason for that? It's harder with the explosive, explosive person because it's not when they're moving fast, then you have to try to slow them down. So you like guards that allow you to control the person. And close guard is the ultimate control. It's not ultimate control, but close guard puts in a position that I'm attacking and you're defending. You cannot attack me from my close guard. We can argue that there might be one or two attacks, but it's, like, very, very, very limited and depends who you're fighting against. I hate the close guard being on top. Well, against a good close guard is very. No one likes. It's terrible. It's horrible. Yeah, it's one sided. Yeah. So even the guard, and he's one sided. The person, the bottle has the advantage. I can be completely relaxed in my close guard, and I cannot be completely relaxed. You know what the most annoying thing is? Is somebody who is both good and extremely confident with the close guard because they have that smug energy about them. They know how much unpleasant, how much work it takes to pass this anyway, especially people with longer legs. Is there something you wish he did differently in how you started training at MMA, in that trajectory, in figuring out how to train, how to get good? Like, what have you learned about getting good at MMA from having done it? If you were to start now, for. Example, I think I'd have to dedicate it more. I didn't dedicate enough both, like, literally time, number of training sessions, training, but. Also mental training wise, physics, I think a lot more the physical part of. It, the strikes, everything. The strike from the beginning. It's because, I mean, I love jujutsu. Like, it's. I truly love all the aspects of it. Fighting, training, you know, the practice, the competition. I don't have that for MMA. So it's hard to give your heart to it, something that you don't have the passion to it, like jujitsu, you know, I gave my heart to it. Like, I did everything that I had to MMA. I never. I didn't do that. So that's why it was. I won't say it was wrong for me to have to do it because I don't regret doing. I always, you know, looking back as a kid, when I decided to, you know, to be. To take jujitsu for life, I already knew that at some point I would have to do MMa. There's almost like, that's the path of a gracie. You know, you. When you ready, you go do Mma. So there was a, like a duty versus a love. Yeah. That was not a choice. That was like, I have to. It's just the life I took. He would lead that way. Are you proud of that step? You know, go against the natural love and towards more duty, I think. I don't regret it because if I hadn't done it, I would feel there was something missing. So I don't regret doing. I would regret not doing. The tricky thing is the choice to go to MMA could have compromised your ability to win against bushes, and it didn't. And it's. It's a fascinating case study. It still doesn't make sense to me. After all those years, you're able to come back and go against the best person in the world and beat him. Yeah. And I had to, because the first fight we had, I had something stuck in my throat for a long time. So you think about that. Oh, yeah. I'm like, as soon as that first fight finished, I had said that got stuck in my throat, that I already. At that point, I knew I'm gonna have to fight him again. I knew. I always knew there's no choice. I have to. Oh, man. All right, well, in terms of no gee, who do you think is the best no gee competitor of all time? There's no question, you know, Gordon is. I mean, it's. I don't think he's right to say the best compared to of all time. Cause he's still very young. I think that's something that he can be aggro in the end of when. The person you don't want him to get lazy. You know what I'm saying? No, no. I mean, but you cannot praise someone in the middle of his career, you know, so it's. You cannot call him the best ever. He's 26 or 27. So it's. I mean, he's great. He's very good. He's ahead of all of other competitors, I think. And, I mean, he's having an amazing career. You know, he's doing amazingly well. So, I mean, when he finished, when he finally retired, then you can argue. Like, you know what? There's wisdom in that. It matters how you finish, right? Of course. It's very interesting. I think the Nogi is relative new. That nogi scene, there was not. There wasn't a scene before. I think he started now on his generation, you know, his time. Because before, like, when I was competing, no, gee, was just ADCC. There's nothing else. Every two years. Emer first was only in the Emirates. You know, you had to go there to compete. So there was not even a scene. There was like this one tournament that gives a lot of money to, you know, all to competitors, to fighters, and brings fighters from other modalities. You know, Mocha Van Narsdale, you know, some wrestlers, Greco Roman, you know, they can compete against each other and they, you know, they create that set of rules, try not to favor anyone. So that was it. So you cannot be called the greatest doggie of all time if you only have one tournament every two years. Only in Emirates, they have to be invited to. But I think now it grew a lot. Now we have so many different tournaments. Now we have a scene. You have people that only train Nogi. They're fully dedicated to Nogi. Then you have supervised different tournaments. So now it's professionally you can do just no gi now, which before was unheard of it, because you have one or two tournaments, if you cannot be called a no gee fighter, fighting once or twice. Once every two years. Twice every two years. Yeah. Now there's entire systems that are optimized for Nogi that could be fundamentally different. Like, what do you think about the body lock? Like this passing with the body lock? I don't know if you get an understanding of it that I think it's okay. It's a popular way to. What is it maybe to apply to stay tight. To stay tight, very close to your opponent. So he can't push, create distance. He can push away, but somehow it. Shuts down the hips as well. Yeah. Makes it more difficult to. Yeah, kind of trap your legs, your back gets stuck on against the floor. Are you like, scientifically curious about these new developments? Do you think? Do you, do you have answers in your head to them? Most. So body lock is one interesting one, obviously, foot locks is another. And I don't mean just the foot locks, but the whole like, control aspect of foot locks. That's interesting. And there's other, there's other interesting stuff. John is really into the wrestling aspect, but not wrestling wrestling, but wrestling everywhere. Jiu jitsu at all levels of the plane. That's very interesting because, you know, obviously Jiu jitsu has not really been, you know, unlike like freestyle wrestling and so on, has not been like a systematic, scientific, rigorous exploration of wrestling. It's like you're on your feet and you're on the ground, not. There's a lot of interest. John is academic. He tried to, you know, numbers, mathematics, everything. Well, you kind of are too. Yeah, no, I mean, not I am, because you have to understand what you're doing. You know, there's a. Everything, there's a step by step, like logistics, like details. Every single move, there's a reason for it. You know, there's things around that happens. It's. The more you know, the better you are, right. The more knowledgeable compared or whatever. So I think with the footlocks, with the nogi, like if you look back, you know, if you think of used to be seen as a really bad thing to attack the foot, it wasn't seen as a good option of attack, mainly. What is it like? Respectable gentlemen don't attack the legs or what? No, because if you look back, you know, the tournaments when they were created, all the rules and everything else was to simulate a real fight with no punches. When I was having a gi, I mean, if you ask what is Jiu jitsu like? What are you trying? What's the main goal of jiu jitsu? To dominate your opponent. What's the main goal of fighting is we're fighting. It's of course, submission is the ultimate goal, but the, you know, before that, the main goal is to dominate you. Like, we're fighting, I have to dominate you. And then the submission comes and foot locks. It's. I don't require any domination on you. I don't. I don't need to be in a dominant position to attack your foot. And if I attack your foot, you're still free to knock me out. If your body goes down to my foot, I can still come close to you or stand up and I'll punch you. So it's not a good position to be in a real fight to attack in the foot. I mean, how many times you've seen that going bad, that went bad in MMA fight? I mean, of course you had some sort of success with the hill hooker. It's no questions, but how many times went wrong. People go knocked out, attack in the foot. So you can't say it's the best position to be, it's okay to go, but it's a very high, risky position to go. So that's why it's not in a real situation, it's not seen as a good thing. So when you translate that to jujitsu, when attacking the foot is not seen as a good thing because when you reflect that to a real situation, it's not going to go down well. So he was always seen as an easy way out, you know, easy cut. You try, you're trying to do easy path. You can't pass my guard, you can't dominate me, then you're trying to attack my foot. That's why it was always seen as a, you know, not as the best, a great submission of which win. But the sad side effect of that is it was completely underdeveloped because of that. Exactly. Of course. So people never really developed that. But now the tournaments, the fighting, he got completely, not completely, but he got some, is no longer seen as, you know, as a simulation of the real thing. Now is a sport. It's only seen as a sport. So now it doesn't matter if you attack my foot, you cannot punch me. So why is it bad now to attack the foot? It's not seen as a bad thing anymore. And now it got really developed. I don't know. That's another bear versus shark question. But, you know, there is, in a street self defense situation, it's possible to imagine where footlocks would be effective for highly. But I guess if you invest 10,000 hours, it's better to invest it in chokes. Yeah. To dominate. If I'm, you know, if we're fighting, it's way better for me to be on your side control on the mount where I can pin you, be completely safe than to stay inside your legs trying to attack your foot. What? People would argue that there's a lot of very dominant controlling positions in the whole footlock game, right? It is. But you can go bad very quickly. Yeah. No, I mean, there's some great ways to control someone that he cannot escape, but it can go bad very quickly. That's the thing. Well, even back control can go bad very quickly on the street. So mount, I don't know, is mount a really good position? But then there's no good position. Then there's no good position. There's no. Every position there's a risk. Okay. Attacking the foot is a way higher risk than side control. Mount back. That's what I'm saying. The back is not the best way to pin someone unless you underneath me, because if you try to rotate, I can sacrifice the back and just allow you being the mount. Okay. There you go. Would you prefer mount or back mount or they're flattened like steel mount. Thought I'd get you. So, yeah, going back to Gordon, what do you think makes that guy so good? We were just a ADCC, got to see him. Historically dominant first performance, his dedication, the way he trains and how much he trains. And of course you have to add his mind, his belief to really try to be good, the best. So, you know, I don't know what his goals are, but I know he tried to be better than his opponent. So his belief are very strong, his dedication. He probably trains more than everybody else. I mean, I haven't seen firsthanded, but from what I hear, interviews with him and everybody else training, you know, the way everybody trains. Yeah. You know, trying to. For my little knowledge I have, I'll bet he trains more than everybody else. And most important, how he trains and when I. I kind of already knew, but when I heard John podcast with you the other day, John was explaining the preparation, the training for the ADCC, and that kind of gave me a very strong idea how they've been training all these years. So, you know, when we said it's, you have to work on your weakness, so you have no weakness. He trains a lot on his weakness, which not everyone does that, you know, if you look other, I'm not going to name, but, you know, other main schools when like very strong competitors, great competitors, super tough people, but super tough, not great because they train, they spar very hard. That makes them tough. If you want to be good, you have to work on your weakness because when you spar, like we're saying, how many times you're going to practice escaping a bad position, like a submission hold or a pinning position, side control mount, or is very little the amount time you get to spend on those positions if you don't start there. So he's very smart the way he trains. And part of that is also cerebral. It's not just putting yourself in those positions, but talking through different ideas like they talk, they experiment. It's very. At first glance, it's philosophical almost, is you're trying to create systems, constantly trying to understand how this fits into this big picture. And. And then it goes back to, what is jiu jitsu? What is fighting? He's fighting for dominance. You know, he's fighting for the ultimate dominance positions, which is back and mount. There's no others. And from that, you finish. So if you look back at his, you know, over the years, you know of his past fights. Before, he used to mainly focus in legs. And over the past few years now, he's mainly focusing in finishing from the mountain back. Well, that's when he became really good. So part of that is Mister John Donahar, what do you think? You've known John for a long time. What makes that guy interesting, special, and good? What have you learned about Jiu jitsu in life from John Donaharthe? He's super smart, I mean, eccentric. And he lives through Jiu jitsu. He's 24/7 thinking better ways to teach how to make his competitors better. And that as a coach, when you have that dedication as a coach, that it makes the most difference of your athletes. Like, which other big team you have that coach with that motivation. All the other schools is either someone that competes that push the training, like Andre Gavin. It's no, he's one of the competitors. So he brings the hype in everyone else, but he doesn't have the time. He doesn't spend the time working individually. I mean, I'm sure he does, but it's limited because he's also a competitor. And, you know, looking. Most of the other big schools, like, you don't have that nowadays. All the leaders, the main coaches for the other big schools, they have other things, other things in their lives. They don't fully dedicate it to the athletes. Joan does. You know, look at the interview. He spends hours and hours a day studying how can await the system to make his athletes better. Look at the results. I enjoy just sitting back and forth. You can actually just get him. You control him essentially, by sending interesting videos. And you could just see his mind. He's gonna do research on that. Cause I kept sending him videos of bears. Cause he claimed that a lion would beat a bear. Because I'd love to get your take on this. Okay, so the bear is much bigger, much stronger. But his take is that the bears don't have experience of fighting to the death. That's not part of the culture. They're more scared. In fact, he keeps sending me footage of, like, even like, a small mountain lion scaring a bear away because they don't want to fight. So his idea is that it really matters, your life experience, how much you fight. It's not necessarily the skill, like the dimensions, the characteristics you have. But then I sent him. I'll show you. People should google this. It's bears fighting of any kind. And it's pretty much the most epic thing ever. Here, I'll show you. Like, look at these guys. The cardio, though, is interesting. You know, it's funny I was going to mention that because I was, you know, flipping to Internet, I came. I came around that video. Look how big these guys are. No, they huge. But you see, they don't bite each other. You think it's just playing. They try intimidating because they don't want to get hurt, so they try to size each other up. You see, the whole fighting is sizing each other up. There's a lot of pushing, and the fur is so thick, so the claws doesn't really damage much. And they're using a tree. So maybe they. Yeah, I mean, there is bites, but see, there's very little. So the whole time they trying to intimidate the other one, like, winning the fight by their size. And mostly about, like, the way drunk college kids fight, which is like some kind of display of dominance versus actual. Yeah, they're not fighting to kill and bear or tiger, you know, they fight to finish unless the other one runs away. Like, one would die. Yeah, lions and tigers. Yeah, but look at the cardio. Look how bad her cardio is. I wonder how my favorite part is when one of them just, like, stands behind a tree and says, all right, he's holding. Let me catch my breath. He sits down. He's like, all right. You can't. It's over. It's like. It's the equivalent in the forest. Tapping out. All right, all right. You got me. Let me just catch you. Look, they're both, like, just shot. But see, the thing that I was trying to make an argument for is that we get this rare footage. It's not rare. I mean, there's, like, hundreds of videos, but it's not millions of videos because there's a huge number of bears. And I was trying to say that there's some badass bear we don't know about because he just goes in there and just does work, and we just don't know about it because he's like everyone. See, the thing is, if you kill a lot of other animals, you probably have a territory that nobody's gonna mess with you. So it's very hard to catch the, uh, the, like the hodge gracie of bears. You know, he's just gonna be sitting there doing nothing. So. I don't know. I don't know. I feel like, of course, when you corner him, John will say that if you put a bear and a lion in a cage, the bear will win. If it's like, if it's. If they're forced to be to the death. But I don't know. Oh, let me ask you another ridiculous thing before I ask serious questions. So Joe Rogan thinks that a tie is an effective way to attack somebody. I don't know if. I can't believe I haven't in the time in Vegas, I didn't talk to you about this. I think it's not. Have you ever explored this as the best choker in the world? Have you ever explored the use. Because, like, jiu jitsu has the jacket, but the tie, to me, is a pretty shitty way to choke somebody. Like, intuitively, it thinks, like, it's a good way, but it can slide around. It feels like. It feels like there's no way to really pin. You would need to. Right. So you use it the way you use a belt? Essentially, yeah. But then I would guess so, yeah. I don't think it's. And I think if it gives you a. It actually has the reverse effect, which it gives you the false sense of confidence that you can use it, and instead it'll just distract you. So he think is a stronger weight than the collar or just a strong way. Yeah. Stronger than the collar. Yeah. I don't see how. Maybe just I. In a street fight scenario. Right. Like, by the time you grab the tie, the guy goes punch your nose. Yeah. What George St. Pierre thinks is the best use of the ties to actually, like, what do you call that? So basically, to all balance them, which is an interesting point to, like, use, too. Yeah. But you can use the jacket for the same kind of thing. Yeah. I don't know. I haven't really fully tested it. It's, I'll say jacket or tie for that perspective of unbalancing, off balancing the person. It can be, yeah. Because you, you know, you have control of the person's neck, the collar, you know, the jacket moves. So for the purpose of off balancing the person, I would agree with George. See, the thing is, that's the thing about martial arts is you can say all kinds of bullshit, but until you really test it in over a period of years through competition, you won't really know. I think, like, that's where my gut says just how easily the time moves. My gut says the collar, there is something really powerful about the jacket. There's, like, the way it sits. I mean, the fact that the arms trap it from rotating. It's a weird piece of clothing. It's a really dangerous piece of clothing that we put on ourselves. Yeah. Like, and it's kind of cool that we've developed this whole martial arts system that allows you to use that to do a lot of damage. It's very interesting. So when we're saying something that you develop over the years of practice, over and over again, going back to the fishiness of the amount of back by experience of attacking people, people always had a much higher chance of escaping from the back than from my mount. So it's, I feel if I mount and you get both my hands on your neck, you cannot escape. If my hands are deep, it's over like that. I don't remember anyone escaping, but I do remember if my hands are deep on your collar or even real naked. Choke is still a hassle. Like, clean. You have some data on this. Is there some aspect to you, to how your body is, the characteristics of your body that that fits a particular set of techniques? So if we just look at jiu jitsu broadly, do you see most techniques being able to work for most people? Like, what you're saying about mount versus back control. Is this. Is it possible for a different body type? The mount is not as effective. Yeah, of course. I'll say very big people. They should amount. You don't think of yourself as big? No, big. I mean fat. Oh, they should stay off the amount. Why is that? That's a counter. It's mobility. It's like, it's. I think, you know, you don't see any, you know, like, there was few weights, like 160 kilos, like, you know, in pounds, I don't know, 270 pounds of a lot of fat. It's. You need a bit of mobility, and that wouldn't. It would play against you. Even back is the same. Requires mobility. Yeah. Okay. So even though it doesn't look like you're moving very much, when you're doing mo, that requires mobility. Cause you have to reposition and weight. Redistributionally, adjusting your body. All right. The legend goes, you got very good by training, mostly with lower ranks. What was your training like in that environment? So when I first moved to London, I was 20 years old. I opened my school there, and I had nobody to train with. I had one guy that was teaching with me at black belt, middleweight. He was good. And that's it. Brawler was. He moved to the same. He moved to England the same time as I did, but he was in Birmingham. So we did got together, you know, maybe twice a week closer, you know, when we were preparing for something, if not, then not very often, as often as we could. But did I say not that often? And I had just colorbell students. There was no one high level. There was no one world champion in any belt. To train. Then you need to create a scenario that simulates, that can simulate, you know, like a realistic fighting. So I think on that aspect, you know, when people said, you know, people ask, why do I have such a basic game? I think that also influenced me sharpen up all my skills when I moved there because, you know, when I'm. If you practice with people, you know, lower level than you, you cannot. There's nothing to learn from them, or, you know, you can learn things and practice with them, but I would say very complex things on them. It is not the best. So it's I sharpen up all my skills. So, you know that when I really improved everything that I already knew to a higher level. But how can you sharpen something if the resistance is much lower level than a purple belt? Makes it very hard for you to skip side control. Doesn't have to be a war chamber black belt. It's, you know, if it's one is holding you, it can be very hard. What about on the attack? How do you become literally, by far the best person at the cross choke from mount by training with purple belts. It's sometimes purple belts defense way better than black belts. Okay, see, a lot of people listening to that would be like, that makes no sense. Hodg Raci, how does that make any sense? Because like a lot of the black belts, even world champions, they get to the black belt. They're really good in what they do, let's say, in the guard, you know, on top or in the bottom position. But their defense are not like very, very few people. High level have a very good defense because they don't practice. Then that goes back to how you train. You know, you can be very tough. Very tough will make you terrible defense because you're not going to practice your weakness. So your weakness still gonna be terrible. You can have the best guard in the world. Impossible to pass the day people pass your guard, you nothing like it's your guard is high, the highest level, but your side control defense or not your mount defense or not, so some purple bells, they practice the mount way more than that black belt did. So naturally, the difference is better. So they get to experience the defensive position much, much, much more. And especially training with, you get really good at defending, and then over and. Over again, you attack them with the same thing over and over again. They know what's coming. They will block, they will develop a defense over that. Yeah. Way better than most other high level black belts. So both put yourself into really bad positions with low ranks and just keep attacking the same way over and over and over. Yeah. And with that, you're able to be at the, at top of the world at the world championships. Yeah. I mean, can you give some, what was the preparation like to a world championship with the lower ranks? I mean, I did a lot of. Boxing, a lot of conditioning. No, but conditioning is a big part of it. But the one thing that helped me extremely living in England, in London, was training judo at the Budokoy in London. That helped me massively because it gave me the motivation to learn something new, because by then at the budoku, I didn't know the stand up was. I'm sure today it is, too, but by then it was even higher than it is today. There were some very high level judo guys training there, and the first time I went there, my stand up was terrible compared to theirs. I mean, it was bad, but compared to them was terrible. So I was getting through like a child, and that motivated me to keep coming back and get better. So that made my jujitsu much stronger. I became, my base got better. My top game improved. My pressure game improved. Did Neil Adams train Ray Stevens when he. I've never met Neil Adams. Have you met Neil Adams? He's the voice of judo. I don't know if you watch the tournaments, he's incredible. Yeah. Ray Stevens is silver medalist in the Olympics. He won european me. He won a lot. So you did some judo training. What's your favorite throw? Like Asoto Uchimata. I would say uchimata if I would pick one. So that made you better at jiu jitsu as well? Yeah, yeah. Okay. And back then, like, for the first, I'll say maybe three years, maybe four, I went to Brazil for, like, two months before every major tournament got it. So I say, you know, I moved away from the school and I really focused. So I was really well prepared with my jewelry and everything else, sharpen up my skills, and then went to Brazil to train with, like, really high level people. So that way I would manage it to compete in the highest level. What advice would you give to? Let's start with a complete beginner. So, you know, a bunch of people come up to me, they still want to start doing jiu jitsu. What advice would you give them? Try to absorb as much technique as you can and try to be as relaxed as you can. Don't, you know, don't desperately try to fight so hard. Like, learn and move slow. Move slow and relax. That's the hardest thing to do. The hardest. You know what I find with people? It seems like it's hard to even know that you're not relaxed. It's like the introspection. They don't even know what it feels like to relax. Not even know. They tense. Yeah, right. They try to relax. They look at you, say, what? What do you mean, relax? I'm relaxed. Exactly. Exactly. The arms are shaking. You feel it. And in terms of going slow, they're like, yeah, well, I'm going slow. No, you're. You're not. Yeah, there's. There's a. There's a grace and elegance of movement that you can probably pick up from a lot of other disciplines. Like, for me, I think that came from just learning piano. Piano at a young age. This for, I think, any mobility thing. To learn how to move efficiently, you have to know how to relax. It's just the fact that you can, like, the body can be tense, or it could be relaxed just knowing that fact. Now imagine you. Shoulders tense. You think you play piano well, no, everything has to be relaxed. I guess some of that is mind, too, but just knowing that and being self aware. But see, like, even me, you know, approaching a thing I'm not. I don't know anything about being a beginner. You're going to tense up no matter. And, like, it actually takes a conscious effort to think, to relax. I mean, that's massively. That's why learning things as an adult is much harder than as a child. Like, it's very hard. And as an adult, it's like, to get to the highest level. It's not possible because you will never relax the way you should. Yeah. Relax in the way that you become like water, but then you solidify in the right places. Yeah. Yeah. Is there advice you can give to an adult? So, like, somebody that has a job, like a hobbyist, like, how to progress, how to get. I mean, train this. Just need to train as much as you can. Not, you know, five, seven days a week because you get. Gonna get injured. I mean, two or three times a week to start is the best way to, you know, to initiate your jujitsu journey and practice the same thing over and over again when they don't work, it's just because you're not doing well, not because, you know, you have to learn something else. Do you see some value in just picking a set of techniques that seem, seem to draw your heart in? Like, for example. I'll give you an example. You're gonna yell at me? But. I never learned close guard. Well, it just never connected with me. You could say it's body mechanics, whatever. It doesn't matter. The point is, it's just like my heart never connected with it. You know, the way I justified it to myself is I felt like when you're bad, you're using the close guard, just like you could use the half guard to stall. So I was really drawn to the butterfly guard as a beginner because I thought I have, or open guard in general. I have no options to stall. So I'm going to learn. My thinking was, let me do the guard that enforces me to learn. And then I fell in love with the butterfly guard and open guard and so on. And I never, I never really understood the close guard. And the other thinking was, do I really need to understand the closed guard? Because it's always by choice that I go there so I can avoid. Not. You can avoid anything you want. I mean, you don't have to do. Anything in this life. Yes. It doesn't make you complete. That means you have, you want to. Be complete as a. This is the question. How valuable is it to be complete? To get good? Depends how good you want to be. Okay, let's go. Well, there's several questions there. Yeah. Okay. Like, to be the best in the world, do you need to be complete? Of course. The best in the world. Of course you have to be complete. Otherwise, you. Somebody's gonna be better than you. But what about, like. So, to understand, to defend, you have to be also good at the offense and in every single position. Otherwise, you, you have a weakness, and someone can capitalize in that weakness. Okay, what about to be, like, a hobbyist? Then you don't have to, but can. You, or is it still bad? I mean, it's not bad. I'm. Nothing is bad. I mean, if, as a hobbyist, you start late, I mean, it's, it doesn't matter how far you're gonna get, as long as you enjoy it. Just train as much as you can. If it's twice a week, twice a week it is. You, you'll be limited how good you will be training twice a week, of course. Then the guy that trains twice a day, you know, it's just the more you train, the better you get. But you have to select what you train. That's what I'm asking. So, no, no. Yes, but, like, for how long? Like, there was some point in your life that you might try something, see if you like it. You know, there's some point on your life that you might. Okay, let me try close guard. You might not like it now. Maybe in two, three years from now. Still don't like it. I kept trying it. Listen. Cause, listen. It's very difficult to get any respect in jiu jitsu. It's hard to get to black belt and beyond in jiu jitsu at a respectable place and not have a good close guard. Close guard is. I mean, don't do it. It's not necessary. I'm being a rebel. No, no, it's not. It's. I'll say, because it's nothing. It's not a position that you under pressure that if you don't know, you'll be in trouble. You're not going to be in trouble not to know the close guard. You're just going to go straight for open guard. I mean, there's not a problem. The main limitation is if you don't do close guard a lot that you don't quite, you don't get a full, complete picture of understanding how to attack close guard when somebody puts you into a close guard when you're on top. So it's nice to know both sides, if it's just to understand. Yeah, but you can have a pretty good understanding of how to defend from the top and not having any bottom. I mean, some of it is also just like the length of legs and just the geometry of your body. I'm sure MaRcelo GARcia has a good. Close guard, but I've never seen. That's the point I'm trying to make. In theory. In theory, you can imagine it, but for a hobbyist, I think it's interesting to think of that. Like, is it possible to. Is it possible to focus on a small set of techniques that help you to develop, of course. Still into a good, juicy and still enjoy and still be most people hobbies. In the jujitsu world? 99%. I mean, people there competes, even the. People that compete, 1%. Max and I. You have high level competitors, have no clue what Coast Guard is. Okay, thank you for making. No, I think you would say that most people don't have Coast Guard is such a, such a difficult position to understand for me. Maybe one day we'll brainwash. Yeah, good. I felt it's too easy to stall versus attack. That was my main concern is like, I want to be forced in every way to, to always be attacking, to always be moving, to always be. And it felt like if I got really good, I've seen it happen with half guard too. It's like when people get really good at half guard, it just feels stally. If you just look at the matches and so on, you slow things down to a thing that's not. You don't get reps on learning, you don't get action in interesting ways. So that was my worry, that I'll get old and fat and just sitting in close guard all day, holding on to the white belts, trying to kill me. Because it's also, I mean, that's the other thing for hobbyists and for everyone is to like, when you first start, I think you have to relax in the face of the fact that you're just getting your ass kicked non stop. Yeah, that can also be really tough on the ego. I think probably the right way to see that is you're growing as a person. You see that clearly when they are like in a bad position. Let's say side mount or mount like a beginner, he will never relax on those positions. The moment that you say go, they like trying to push you out and explode. There's no relaxation and work on the defense. It's like, no, it's out and go until I have zero to give, until I'm exhausted. My arms cannot move. It's kind of fun to watch, actually. What's the role of drilling? Do you like drilling? I do not like drilling, but I'll tell you why I think fighting is mechanic. Right? So it's very important to drill a move until you learn the mechanic. Of course it's important. If someone want to teach you an armlock, you want to practice that movement until you learn the mechanic of it. But the guy's not resisting, so it's easy to apply it, right? So you apply as many times as you have to, until you know the mechanic of the moves, until you can apply the mechanics. The moment that you know how to apply, there's no more point in drilling. Now you have to practice. Now we have to practice with resistance. Of course you're not going to practice with the guy fully resisting. The guy is better than you because he's not going to give you a chance to practice that move. But you have to practice with resistance. So where does drilling comes on? That is, most of people, you know, they flow drill and everything. I think whatever you do, you condition in your body to do something is the, you know, you do, you repeat the same move over and over again as your body's conditioning to apply that movement or the technique. Drilling is not realistic because the other person is not resisting, you know, the flow movement or whatever. After you go beyond when you already know the mechanics. The drilling with no resistance is not going to teach you anything because you will never know if how to apply the movement with resistance. So it's pointless to carry on drilling after you learn the mechanics. See, but youre a making it sound easy to learn the mechanics. I would argue you can drill as many time. I'm not limiting how much you drill. Yes, you drill as much as long as you had to. I mean, it doesn't matter how long. The benefit of drilling. I'm just playing devil's advocate with you. The benefit of drilling is that you can more efficiently get a higher number of reps in. So what are you gonna gain with those reps? Understanding the mechanics of the movement. And what I would like to argue is you don't necessarily need a resistance to deeply understand the mechanics of something. Now, I don't know. There's something for some, there's some moves like, I bet you you could drill your way to an incredible mount. Like Mount is a good example of that. You don't really need a resistance. I can imagine a world in which the resisting opponent is not essential for developing some of the very fine details of the mechanics. Which one? Because I don't know any. What you say mount? Yes. What you're gonna achieve by drilling with no resistance after you learn the mechanics. But see, what I'm trying to tell you, the learning the mechanics isn't a thing where you get a certificate and you're done. You're gonna learn the fine details of the way you redistribute your weight. You're going to learn how to move your. I don't understand. A dead body. What? Yeah, like, everything you do is a slow process. And timing. Do you have timing? You can't have to understand moving, okay? It's the guy's resistance. Like, it's not. I'm not going to grab you and apply the movement. I need to grab you and feel when is the right time to do like that. That only comes when you with movement. If you're not fully resistant, how would I know? You couldn't infer through it. It's like with no movement, with no resistance. Like there's some resistance. Let's see. I'm lock. Okay. Okay. Let's say you've been drilling for a week. Yeah. 5 hours a day. You should be an expert with the mechanics. But now how are you gonna carry on with drilling with no resistance? No, you have after that week drilling five times 5 hours a day, the arm lock. You still have no clue how to apply the arm lock against a resisting opponent. No clue. Zero. So you don't know the movement. You know the mechanic, which is, you know, it's like how long you have to drill and how. That doesn't matter. It varies of the person you can do for a month. After that month is overdevelop. You should understand how the mechanic works. You still have no clue how to apply the movement against a resisting opponent. You will never ever know how until you apply with a fully resistant opponent. That's the only way to know, to really learn a movement. Yes, well put. But the question is, can you have a small percentage of time when you go against the resisting opponent to get the wisdom and the insight of what it takes to perform that movement? And you spend a large percentage of other time just practicing the mechanics of it. So like, do you need to, as you get better and better at technique, to basically drift away completely from drilling and more into the sparring? I'd like to. I just. You like drilling? No, I don't like drilling. I see, I. Well, yes, I like drilling, I would say, but I just see. It always bothered me in the jiu jitsu community how few people really saw the value of drilling. I seen in wrestling, especially in the, in the russian style of wrestling, like the value of drilling. I don't necessarily mean that it's like a dead body or like a dummy or something like that, but just getting the reps in, really focusing on the high amount of reps. I agreed. In wrestling and judo, I agreed that drilling is very important. Initial drill, a thousand times each move. Yeah. Judo is a really big one for. It is because it's the movement. The timing, you know, is the precision of the movement. It has to be perfectly because it's one movement. Then you learn about the timing of the movement when you're fighting, but during fighting, you only need to know the time because your body movement is exactly the same when you drill. That's really well put. Yeah. The mechanics is much more important there. Yeah. But it's completely different for jujitsu because let's say from jujitsu like the armlock, for example. We use that as an example, let's say, from the close guard, even my close guard, before I go for the arm lock, I need to have set of grips. Let's say I have your collar in your arm, right? And then, you know, when you're drilling, I'm gonna grab your arm, I'm gonna grab your collar, and I'm gonna drill my body until I can apply the arm lock and finish. And I can do that a thousand times. Okay, now we're fighting. We start with the grip. The moment that I initiate the armlock attack, he will defend. The arm lock will not work. So it's not the one movement that will get me to attack the arm. There's a, there's a combination of other things that I need to do. I need to feel about your weight. You know, I need to get you close to me. There's so many other things involved that I need to feel. That only comes with life. Life with a fully resistant opponent. Yeah. So pretty quickly, it has to be live. Yeah. And then it comes how you practice, how you train, starting on that position and just saying, let's go. And the moment that we disengage from that position, we go back. That's when you really learn, because everything that you do wrong, you're going to go back there and you're going to try again, try again, try again. And the repetition, it will teach you have a feeling of timing when to go. If there's, you know, there's other combinations which you always have to go with it. By the way, for the Internet that's currently yelling at me for arguing with Hodra Gracie about drilling, that's called, you know, playing devil's advocate to strengthen, to explore ideas. I'm not actually arguing. Okay. I forgot to ask you, if you had to fight against the bear line, gorilla, or anaconda to the death, which one would you choose and would you be able actually to win against any of them? A bear. A lion. A tiger. A tiger. A condo. Oh, gorilla too. Gorilla. You can go. Gorilla. I'll probably choose. Diana Konda. That's easy. I mean, you're not allowed to run away, though, so you're in a cage. Do you have to kill still the anaconda? I think I have no chance against any other ones. Zero chance. That's what John thinks. I think I have a tiny little against the anaconda. Just wait it out. You don't, you don't think it's possible to be. I just. It feels like technique can do something against these animals, but they have so much strength, so much aggression. You know, the real naked choke, translating to Portuguese, is kill the lion. So ever since I was a kid, I always thought that maybe if I get behind a lion, the real naked choke, which, you know, in Portuguese he says Mataleon. So Mataleon is kill the lion. So I always thought that that's the only way to kill a lion. Or, you know, if you're fighting against a lion, you go behind, you put the real naked choke. I think you put him to sleep. Or the name Mataleon. Yeah. Is like kill the lion. Yeah. Someone came up with the name. Why? Somebody must have, maybe someone fight with their lion. Choked him up. There you go, John. There you go. I honestly. Do you think so? Actually, yeah. You. You understand controlling positions. Do you think, like animal. Like a gorilla or a lion would shake you off if you had back full you locked in? Well, say the one that will have the biggest chance of staying there is the lion, because you just feel body. Yeah. Is smaller than a tiger, I guess. Think tigers are bigger? Yes. So. So do you think they can shake you off, though? I think I'll have a bigger chance of staying against a lion's pack than any other animal. Still not answering the question. Do you think you have a chance? If I start on the back, start. Full, locked in, full controls. Let's say it's a small enough lion, you can actually have a full. That would get so. I mean, I would like to believe so. Okay. Just like you said, somebody must have been able to do it. Throughout your journey in jiu jitsu, have there been low points? Like, has there been points where you really doubted yourself? No, I never really doubted myself. There's low points in defeats. Those are the low points when I lost. How did you deal with defeats? I just went back to the gym next week and say, I need to get better. Every time I lost, I'm like, I need to get better because I need to choke them out. I need to submit them because, you know, win by points. It's. As a black belt, I have very, very little loss, I would say. I mean, I don't like to sound like a crime, baby, but I'll say most, most of those loss was very, very controversial. Yeah. It was not a dominant, clear performance. It has about referees and points and I. Everything since I was very young, I always fought against my opponent and the referee. Like, it's. If that was ever in my whole life since I was a kid, there was ever a doubt. You always go to my opponent. Always. Always. That was just something that I had to do my whole life. What's the motivation behind what led to the fact that you win most of your matches by submission or in dominance? Like, are you chasing? Because that's the only way to prove you better. And I've never. I never fought to win tournaments. That was never my goal. That was the consequence of me trying to be the best. Like, I don't care how many titles I have. I care about. I need to beat all my opponents and not. Not win, because win is not enough. I have to submit them. That's the only way to prove I'm the best, to submit them. If I win by advantage or a point, that means I was better than them that day. That does not mean I'm better than them. If there's the top, if I take you down, pass your guard, mount you, and submit you, there's zero questions. Who's the best? Like, there's nothing you can say about it. If I foot sweep you, put your butt on the floor, I get an advantage. We carry on fighting, and I. Winden means nothing. Not even means I'm better than you. And if that happened, that would haunt you. It is for me. It's not enough. I wouldn't be happy. What advice would you give to young folks who look at you, who are able to accomplish from a place where you're not very good to becoming the best in the world at a thing? What advice would you give them? To have a journey like that, to have a journey where they could be successful in their career and their life. To such a high level determination is the most important thing. You need to know where you're going to get there. So you need to have a goal, which, whatever that goal is like, you need to set that goal for yourself so you know where you want to go and to have the determination to get there and be sure that you will fail many times. Like, you cannot let your failures bring you down because you will fail many times. Everybody does. So you said you didn't look to external sources of belief. You just believed in yourself. Is there something to that where you have to try to, like, be your own source of belief? Flame the fire within yourself. Was that. Was that something difficult to do? Like, that was just very natural for me. I said, you know, you can surround yourself with great people. That is extremely important. Don't surround yourself with failures, because they will. They're not gonna push you to, you know, they don't know what it is how to get there. I mean, everybody knows, but it's when you surround yourself with winners, you know, you know what it took them to get there. Use them as an example. Yeah. There's a certain kind of aura to people that just achieve great things and being around them, but it's still, it's hard to find people that, especially at. That early stage area. Yeah, any area. That's right. Yeah. Greatness has a certain, I think it's almost humbling just to see, okay, any human, like, at least that's the lesson I learned. Almost any human can do, could be great. I mean, one, I views Muhammad Ali as a great example. Look at his belief. Look at how much he believed himself before he was Muhammad Ali. Look at the determination he had, the weight, the confidence he had fighting even on his loss. They never changed him. When he fought foreman, George Foreman, not one person in the world thought he was going to win that fight by himself. He never doubted himself. Everybody else did. He won over all odds against. So it's, I mean, when you look at people like that, you can, you don't have to be a boxer to try to follow his example. But see, those are like epic, giant battles. But I feel like you fight the same kind of battle when you're young and your parents tell you that just with their whole energy, that this is silly. Don't be silly. Don't be silly to chase. It's harder. It is harder. But as a kid, it's harder to deal with that because, I mean, to go against adults, especially parents, telling you otherwise, like, the amount of strength you need is gigantic. I don't even know how much strength you need because that was not my case. So I can understand what you have to go through with the force of your parents telling you, you know, otherwise, but it's how much you want, it will dictate how far you're gonna go, where you're gonna go. So it's, you know, if you can break through that, you get nowhere. It's that simple. And actually, one of the really nice things the Internet does that I would give advice to young people is, like, you can find, even if your parents are not a source of that, your teachers, your community, you can find people on the Internet will believe in you. It's kind of cool. It's kind of cool how the Internet opens the possibility of, like, a community of, like, 1011 year olds. Like, building shit. I see this all the time. Engineering. They, I mean, they're fuel by belief. They want to, they want to be like, they want to create the next trillion dollar company. Right there. There's that fire in their eyes, and not for the money, obviously, but to do something really impactful. And I think that fire is extinguished often by teachers and, and parents because I think the logic that parents have and teachers, they look at a kid and they don't, on the surface level, they don't see greatness, right. They just see kind of mediocrity. And so to them it's like, no, right. The world is more complicated than that. In order to get great, you have to like, like they somehow kind of always try to be reasonable with you and in so doing, extinguish the flame. It's weird. I think most people are afraid to even try. So you can call them cowards for not trying, because you are a coward for not trying. Not putting yourself at risk, right. So I would say a big part of society are cowards for never trying. Never pursuing what they really want is. So it's, there is a, you know, weight, a pressure. Everyone, most people, a lot of people, I'll say around you that because they were afraid to try, they don't incentivize people to do so, because they want everybody to be like them. Because imagine if everybody around you suddenly are not afraid and everyone is trying and you look yourself in the mirror and say, I was too scared. I've never tried. So you feel really bad about yourself. So it's easier to have people around you that think exactly like you than otherwise. So they reflect a lot on the kids. It's, you know, society almost like press them down to be like everybody else, to have a normal life, normal job. It's, you know, don't take risk because you can lose it all. I mean, that's the worst thing you can tell everybody, take all the risks, lose it all a few times. That's how you're going to build things. Especially when you're young. Yes, you can recover much. Exactly. What's the point of not trying? You should try and you will lose everything. Doesn't matter what matters, to lose at everything. It does matter. It will teach you resilience. Try harder, go after. It's don't live a normal life because otherwise you. What we're here for. Yeah, take big risks, take a lot of them. Fail and fail worse. Fail and fail a thousand times until you succeed. And then you're gonna, you'll be the most proud of yourself. Like, they're not. Be priceless. It's, then we'll change the world. It is true. That most people are not necessarily cowards, but have cowardice in them. It's. Most people are just afraid to try it, you know? And a lot of it comes from a place of love. Because, you know, if you try and you fail, you get hurt. It hurts. I mean, it's not. Not a pleasant thing to fail. I mean, you feel terrible to think, you know, when I lost, any tournament was a good thing, you know, and think when I was getting beat up at the gym over and over again was a good thing. When I was getting there and getting smashed by all the good guys, I think I liked it. Well, I hate it. But it's my resilience that, you know, make me carry on until I succeed. I think I like to get tapped. Well, I'm the most competitive, one of the most competitive persons, you know. I hate to lose, but it's. I accept. I mean, I just need to get better. Every single time I lost in the championship. I hate you. I've never screamed. No one never saw me screaming, shouting that, you know, I got robbed, you know, I should have won. The referee, you know, screwed me over. I mean, it's okay. It happened. Shit happens. I need to get better. Cause I don't want to be in that position ever again. So when I fight, if I'm better, if I tapped him, there's no question. I don't need to wait for the referee to decide that there was points or no points. If, you know, his interpretation, that made me better because I was even more determined to be better. In my mind, I have to tap everybody else. Winning is not enough. It's just, objectively speaking, what you learn the most from is really wanting to succeed and then failing and doing that often. That's the reality. From a parent, from a teacher perspective, from anybody, from people you love, if they really want to do something, help them do that thing. If you think they're going to fail, good, help them do that faster so they fail faster. They're going to learn the only way. To succeed is failing. There is no other way. That's what people have to understand. Without failing, there is no success. Since you've gotten a little softer, a little more emotionally open, what's the role of love in the human condition? Hodge, Gracie. Probably the most important thing. That's the basic of everything, right? It's. I mean, love brings the best of us. It's. If we had more love and compassion from the other person, I think we'll be a more evolved species. The world would be much better place than it is now. Did friends, family help you along the way? Yeah, a lot. I always had a lot of love and help from many people. That's why I succeeded. I never got here by myself. I had a lot of people who loved me, believed in me and helped me get to be here today. Well, I'm glad they did. I'm glad you're here today. I'm a huge fan. It was an honor to meet you. As an honor to hang out with you in Vegas, to hang out with you again today. I've just been a huge fan for a long time. My pleasure man. Thank you for everything you're doing. Thank you for this conversation. It was awesome. Thank you very much. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Hodra Grace. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Hodgepodge. Jiu Jitsu is simple. You just have to do it right. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time. It.

Utterances:
Speaker A: In my mind, I have to tap everybody else. Winning is not enough.
Speaker B: The following is a conversation with Hadja Gracey, widely considered to be the greatest jiu jitsu competitor of all time. This is the Lex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Hodjer Gracie. Let's start with possibly the greatest match in jiu jitsu history. Your second match against Buchesia. Let's go through the details. Let's go through the whole thing. So the walk leading up to it, you always do this walk. It's an epic walk. You post on Instagram. Hanzo posted on Instagram this calm walk towards the mat. Well, let's go to that match in particular. What was going through your mind? You've been away from competition, facing probably one of the greatest, and at that time, many people considered the greatest jujitsu competitor of all time in Buchecha. Here's the old man, the old timer. Getting back out there, what were you thinking?
Speaker A: Yeah, I think that's the first time since probably I got my black belt that I wasn't the favorite walking to a fight. I have to say, like, a lot of people thought consider him the favorite. I mean, understandable, you know, I was out of competition for a while. He was just winning everything. So, you know, saying about the walk, like, for me, you know, the fight starts way before the referee say go. You know, it's all the focus and concentration that I think is very important for me to start before, like, you know, I almost walk blind to the mat many times. I passed, like, great friends, and I couldn't see anyone. You know, they're trying to talk to you, and I'm like, I'm 100% focused on my opponent already, even though that I cannot even see him in front of me. So I think that's, for me, was always very important to try to clear my mind out from everything.
Speaker B: Are you visualizing the opponent or not? Just clearing?
Speaker A: Not at that. Not at that time.
Speaker B: Is there, what's in your head? Is it like a calm river with birds chirping?
Speaker A: What's the blank?
Speaker B: Just blank. Darkness?
Speaker A: Yeah, darkness.
Speaker B: Okay. And that's what we see in that calmness, is just blankness. How hard is it to achieve that blankness?
Speaker A: It's difficult to say because I think. I don't remember when I'll say. Probably as a black belt, I try to focus like that, not to think, because it's probably something you learn, is the more you think, the more nervous you get. And there's nothing that you're gonna gain by thinking of the fight or the possibilities. What, you know, what you can't do, what can go wrong, what can go right, because it's unpredictable. You have absolutely no idea. It's impossible to predict the fight.
Speaker B: And you discover that if you just let those nervous feelings go and empty your mind, it actually is pretty effective.
Speaker A: It is. It makes you feel better. It's, you know, you kind of control your emotion, control the adrenaline on your body up to a level. So it absolutely helps you, you know, focus in the fight.
Speaker B: I've learned that in jiu jitsu and in general in life, that whenever something feels really shitty, you can just, like, take that thought and not think about it.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Like, I do that, like, on long runs or, like a fast run or. Yeah. In jiu jitsu, especially now, you getting older, out of shape, like that feeling of exhaustion. Well, you can always get to the feeling of exhaustion. You could just not think about it.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Not think about being exhausted.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Just. And that somehow relaxes you. I think maybe in the face of exhaustion, all the fears start to creep in. Maybe your muscles tighten up. I don't know. This is for the amateur jujutsu person, but it's kind of funny how you can just take that thought and let go of it. So you get, as a black belt competitor, you get used to. You get good at letting go of. Any thoughts.
Speaker A: Yeah. When you mention to exhaustion is. That's another good example of it. It's, you know, there's a lot of times in the fight you're getting tired, and you're getting pretty tired, so it's like the last thing you want to think of it is how tired you are. It doesn't matter because it doesn't. What are you gonna do, quit? I mean, it doesn't matter. It's how tired you are.
Speaker B: There's no value thinking about it.
Speaker A: There's no value, so you just have to go through it.
Speaker B: So when you're, like, many minutes into the match and you're slowly moving, as you sometimes do, tying your belt, catching your breath, you're not thinking about anything. You're trying to let go of thinking.
Speaker A: I'm trying to, like to save everything, to defy, like, nothing goes to waste. It's, you know, every move unnecessary. It's just going to make you more tired or it's going to take something out of you. Like, you know, I try to calculate every single move I make, save as much energy as I can so I can fully, you know, be focused 100% in the fight with no way, especially energy wise.
Speaker B: And that's instinctual, like minimizing the amount of moves. You're not, like, explicitly thinking, should I do this or not? It's just. Just don't move unless it's absolutely required.
Speaker A: Yeah. Because fight is. You cannot really. There's no really time to think much, you know, so it's, your instincts are playing. It's like it's, you know, you already have your, you know, your weapons. Let's say, you know, you did the things that you do at. It's just you wait for the perfect moment. The beauty of it is there's the right moment to everything. If you feel 1 second too late, doesn't work, nor you get messy. So it's, you know, you try to catch that moment. That is, you know, and for that, you have to be fully focused on what you're doing because 1 second is you out. It won't work.
Speaker B: But you're not exactly known as somebody that moves super quickly. So the moment I. It's not about how quickly you move, it's about the right moment.
Speaker A: So you move slowly. Yeah. Yeah. It's not like speed. It's not like you have to move the speed of light. It's the move itself at that precise moment. It doesn't have to be super fast because your opponent's not moving super fast, you know, so it's a combination of moving between you and him.
Speaker B: I mean, the same thing happens in judo, and the movement can be really small.
Speaker A: Yeah. It's just judo is a bit more explosiveness. You know, it moves on slightly faster. So he did know. He does require a bit more explosiveness in judo.
Speaker B: But even just the right timing for an off balance, just a little tug.
Speaker A: It's not that, you know, moving, the speed is not going to count that much.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: It's the timing that you initiate that move.
Speaker B: You see that with foot sweeps. There's nothing more beautiful than nothing like a olympic level athletes going at it in the Olympics and a perfect. And it's just. And you see one man's life flash before his eyes and realize, like, I'm supposed to be the top three person in the world, that I just find they don't, they have this look on their face like, I don't know what just happened. It's beautiful to see. You don't see that. I guess you see that in boxing, knockouts and stuff like that. You don't know what the hell just.
Speaker A: Happened to is that precise moment of movement. That you get caught, like, is that one split second? That's it.
Speaker B: Do you get that in jiu jitsu at all? Cause judo has, because of the explosiveness, because of the point scoring system that incentivizes these giant throws, has these moments where everything just turns on a single moment. Do you have that in jiu jitsu?
Speaker A: Not really, because Dennis points is. You get, like, you know, two points. So it's because I think regarding the submission is not just one precise movement that changed everything. I think judo is the takedown that counts as a submission. Like ipon fight over jujitsu. Don't have that. So you will. You will score points. But I think in terms of submission, you need to get to in a dominant position first, and then the submission will come slowly.
Speaker B: It's a process.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Okay, let's go back to that guy with his mind. So, actually, in the weeks leading up to it, in the days, in the hours, in the minutes, is there some fear in you leading up to this?
Speaker A: I mean, I'm not gonna say, you know, that I'm fearless because everybody fear something. You know, the fear is there, but it's like, how much you let that control you. I think I was a lot more confident than fearful, for sure. Walking through that fight. Like, I was pretty confident that, yeah, I could beat him.
Speaker B: What was the source of that confidence?
Speaker A: My belief on me, I can take the word.
Speaker B: You can take anyone in the world, but is there specific, strategic, like, you know, talking to Donaher, he believes that there's no such thing as confidence. Like, or rather, the way you get confidence is through data, like that. You have proven yourself effective in previous situations, but with bushes, you don't have much data. It was a very, the first time you faced him was a very tough. That was also one of the greatest matches of all time. That's very tough. So doesn't that creep in, like, that doubt because you don't. You don't have enough data to be confident based on.
Speaker A: Yeah, I mean, okay, if I never have fought before, you know, suddenly walk into a fight with someone like that, then would I be that confidence? I mean, probably no. You know, so that history of what, you know, what we've been doing, what we've been achieving, does, gives you confidence. If that was my first fight ever, I wouldn't probably. I wouldn't be that confident.
Speaker B: But the time off, it doesn't matter. Doesn't matter.
Speaker A: Doesn't matter.
Speaker B: You don't have the fear or the actual physical experience, the psychological experience of being rusty, of being out of the.
Speaker A: Training, that will come out on training.
Speaker B: So you, okay, so you simulate some aspect of that in the training.
Speaker A: The training will tell you how you are.
Speaker B: Did you increase the intensity of the training leading up to this?
Speaker A: Yeah, I mean, I trained, I trained normal, let's say, compared to the first fight. The second one was a lot more confidence because, you know, like I said on training, the training for the first fight, you were terrible.
Speaker B: So what do you mean?
Speaker A: I think I was focusing mma for a while, for a couple months and I wasn't really focusing the gear. And, you know, by the time I accept the fight and start training, like, all my responses on training were off. Like, all my training partners that I used to train with that I destroyed, I mean, now they, like, they beating me, you know, it's like I cannot beat them the way I was used to, but, you know, so I knew something was not right for the first fight, but then it's, you know, no points is submission or draw.
Speaker B: So, yeah, for people who don't know, it was in Montremoris, which is a 20 minutes match, submission only. So there's no, the winner's determined only, bye, submission. Otherwise it's a draw.
Speaker A: So physically I was, I wasn't myself on that fight. I was tired and my body wasn't responding anyway, so that, so the conflict was different from the first. The second, I think I was confident enough that I wouldn't get tapped out on the first, that I was still gonna fight because he has to tap me out to beat me. And I trust on my defense, I'm confident enough for my defense that he will not tap me out. But in terms of winning, you know, walking to the second fight, I was a lot more confident.
Speaker B: What can you say about that feeling when something's not right? Isn't that a thing that breaks people.
Speaker A: It's weird. Breaks. It's weird. Like people crack. They give up. You know, this is a big test because it's like being really tired. It's the same thing. It's like a lot of people crack because they just feel they cannot give it more. They have nothing more to give, so they just like give up. It's too hard.
Speaker B: So what do you do? Just, again, take the thoughts out.
Speaker A: There is no giving up. I mean, I don't mind, I don't care. Like, just giving up is not an option. It's not.
Speaker B: That's always the way you thought.
Speaker A: Yeah. About jiu jitsu, yeah, I never gave up. I mean, I tapped, it's, you know, not giving up is not tapping. That's just stupid. Especially now during training. Like, it's. I get caught, I tap. I've never, ever hurt myself by not tapping. I get you get angry, you know, train hard, you know, improve, make it, make yourself better. You got caught, accept that you made a mistake, give up, tap, then try harder. So, you know, the not tapping, it's you sacrificing your body, and you know, you'll never be the same. Like, if you let your elbow pop, the elbow will never, ever be the same, ever. You let yourself go to sleep, your resistance drops. So it's. Everybody has a, has a limit of resistance until they, you know, you to resist a choke before you pass out. The moment that you go to sleep, that resistance would dropped.
Speaker B: I've never heard anyone say that. That's awesome. That's true. So tap this. So that's the reason, because people usually.
Speaker A: Say, it's no, you can, it's the same. Or you getting knocked out. You get knocked out. The first time your resistance dropped, your jaw gets weaker.
Speaker B: Just for the record, I've never gone to sleep in GSA, which means my resistance is high, right? I don't know.
Speaker A: Must be. Oh, your defense is pretty good.
Speaker B: I don't know about that because it doesn't make sense to me. Or maybe in my case, I think my understanding of when I'm screwed is pretty good.
Speaker A: There's no, you know, you're in trouble.
Speaker B: Yeah. One of the things I regret the most about my jiu jitsu journey is not having given enough time to being in really bad positions. Like, the better I got, I think the less I started being in bad.
Speaker A: Positions, which is because you spar. That's like. That is how you train.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Because you used to just spar. When you spar, it's difficult to be in bad positions a lot. You train with better people. But, I mean, let's say five, six minute rolls, how long you're gonna be in a really bad position? Not long. Right. So you don't really have time to develop. That's why people, they don't train in bad positions. Cause you have to start there over and over again to be used to it.
Speaker B: Yeah. Or put yourself there. I just didn't have that mindset. I think. I think you start. I mean, part of the fun of jiu jitsu is as you get better and better, you have certain people you go with. You have these puzzles that you figured out that you're playing, very specific details you're working out, you're trying to improve your main, like, techniques and so on. But, yeah, just the percentage of time you spend being submitted or being, or trying, even going against, like, lower ranks, trying to escape basic submissions is low. I don't know if that's true for most people. Probably is right.
Speaker A: Most people have very bad defense because they don't allow themselves to be there. Because, I mean, who wants to get tapped? Because you will until you work on your defense. Of course you're going to get tapped or you're not going to escape. You're going to struggle to escape. So people, they don't want to be there.
Speaker B: I regret it most because of the effect it clearly had on how I competed. It was clear that my competition was constantly driven by conservative thinking. Like, don't take risks. I think because of a weak defense, honestly, and I think a lot of any of the fear, like, for example, exhaustion was accompanied by fear because of weak defense. I think if I were to psychoanalyze myself and I regretted it. I regret it a lot. But speaking of which, I don't think anyone's ever submitted you in competition.
Speaker A: So you're saying, well, I was a juvenile. Yes.
Speaker B: Yes. So when you were a young person.
Speaker A: Yeah. Six.
Speaker B: That still haunt you?
Speaker A: No, this first. I was winning that fight by a large. I mean, I think by six points or four, something like that. But I was like, I was.
Speaker B: Remember it, though, huh?
Speaker A: By the details. Yeah.
Speaker B: You ever beat him again?
Speaker A: He never competed again.
Speaker B: Whoever you are, please, let's do a podcast. We'll talk shit about Hodra the whole time. No, but what do you attribute to that, too? You're saying you were confident that the top of the world, the number one buchesha, would not submit you. So where is that confidence grounded? And what do you attribute the fact that nobody was able to submit you first?
Speaker A: It comes from training. You know, I train a lot. Bad position, like, my defense is good because I practice over and over again as much as I practice all my offensive position. So it's, you know, you have to train both equally. It's not just being a good position. You have to be in bed. So I think that's a very strong part of my game. To be a complete fighter, a complete martial artist, you have to be good in every single position. Every single one. Those that you know you have a weakness. So it's, you know, to be complete, you should have no weakness. So that was always my, you know, I was always very particular on that. Like, it's where my weakness, where I don't feel good at it. If you put them in a position to struggle, how to escape. How do I get out? Everything. Any submission locked penny position, you know, back mount, everything. It doesn't matter which position I up. I practice over and over again. So that when I, if I get there in a fighting situation I will know how to get out. At least I'll have a direction, you know, I will know. This is my way out.
Speaker B: Do you practice both escaping the bad position and the transition into the bad position? Avoiding it? Because that's how it happens. You know Jiu jitsu, you start in a neutral position.
Speaker A: No, the transition then it then becomes that the fight itself. Being there is most important is when you're there. Then you have to know how to get out. That's your weakness. How stopping the person getting that is something different. They're two different things. Either you practice one or the other, so.
Speaker B: But both are important, I guess. But the stopping the person is easier to practice because that comes naturally in training.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: What was the actual process like? What was your biggest weakness throughout your. Like just remembering what was annoying to you to figure out.
Speaker A: I mean, outside control is always bottom of psychonaut. Bottom. It's regardless how much you practice, it's not ever easy. You'll never be easy.
Speaker B: But it's so annoying it makes no sense.
Speaker A: Yeah. Someone pins you down, doesn't want to move much, is a big and strong guy regardless of who is not going to be easy to escape. So some situations are just hard.
Speaker B: That must be the. Sorry to interrupt. I'm interrupting hydrograc but you just made me realize if you're really good, if you're, if you're going against like the perfect jiu jitsu competitor, probably. Side control might be one of the hardest positions. Is it the hardest position to escape?
Speaker A: It's one of them. If the person doesn't want to progress.
Speaker B: It'S concerned about like the best pinners in the world. I mean, partially because I've just seen judo. People that know how to pin.
Speaker A: Yeah. They go skip their second choice. A nightmare. It's a nightmare. Doesn't matter how much you practice, it's a nightmare.
Speaker B: And it's also just frustrating, I think. I guess it is also frustrating because a lot of people in that position will be about maintaining control, not progressing. And usually people when they're mountain and back control are usually trying to progress towards a submission which opens up opportunities for escape. So what's the actual process of just time and time again putting yourself inside a bottom of side control.
Speaker A: Yeah. Over and over again, starting there. Escape, back, escape, get back. If it mount, you, get back. Any situation outside that, stop, start again, stop, start again. And it has to be, I would say, five minutes, because it's the repetition that will teach you, you know, if you train, like, three minutes on top, you have time to, you know, one thing, and then timeout is the repetition that over and over again, you know, when you try the same move over and over again, then you see what can go wrong.
Speaker B: And is it understanding the details of the movement or actually doing the movement and feeling it?
Speaker A: It's both. First, you have to understand the movement and then practice. But most important thing is defense, escape coming second, because you know he's attacking you. The one thing is if he's not trying to submit you, but the other one, if it is, let's say if a person is very good, has a very good attack, the first thing is defense. Not just escape and expose yourself to even worse position, because that is very risky. When you're trying to escape, you'll always expose yourself to a worse position. So avoiding that it's, you know, first is defense, not getting caught. I. And then when you escaping, don't be in a worse position than you are.
Speaker B: So defense, in jiu jitsu, when you're wearing a gi, what does defense entail? Is it mostly grips? Is it mostly the positioning of your hips and legs?
Speaker A: It's everything together, because it's a whole body movement. It's constantly moving your arms, legs, body. They have to. Everything works together.
Speaker B: Going back to the mind of that guy, so confident. No fear at this point. Is there a bit of ego in there, too?
Speaker A: Yes. Like I say, no, I'm not gonna say I'm fearless. Of course, this concerns that fight, I would have to say, was probably the fight that I got nervous the most walking in because I knew what that meant. That fight, that meant everything for me. All my legacy was on the line, because if I lost that fight forever, I would be number two. Yeah, forever. And, I mean, bushisha is a great, great guy, great competitor. JujItsu is very good, but I'm better than him. I knew thAt.
Speaker B: But he's competing nonstop at that point.
Speaker A: He's a great competitor, you know, taking nothing out of him. He's super tough. Very, very tough. Very good. He's probably the best competitor in jujitsu. No, he won 13 times the world championship. I won ten. So as a competitor, you know, he has more titles than I do, so. But in terms of, you know, AnalyZinG the game, I consider technically better than him. So knowing all that, everything that I build, all my legacy, it's.
Speaker B: If I lose both riding on this.
Speaker A: Match, if I lose this fight, I'm forever number two.
Speaker B: And none of that is going. Going through your mind.
Speaker A: No, I knew. I mean, it's not at that moment that I already knew that. I remember just before the curtains open, I'm standing, and before they called my name, and, I mean, my legs were like, I feel the adrenaline kicking on my legs, and I'm like, you know, I'm hitting the legs. I'm like, wake up, you know, get off. Get adrenaline off me, you know. So it was intense. It was intense.
Speaker B: And this was in Rio.
Speaker A: That was in Rio, so my hometown.
Speaker B: So this is. And, you know, Rio is not exactly known for its calmness in its fans. So this is like wherever they hosted the Olympics the year before.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: So this is like, I mean, this, like, the whole basically martial arts community is watching, watching that fight.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: I mean, is there some. Was Hanzo there?
Speaker A: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker B: So people are just. I mean, there's a tension. It's also. I mean, I don't know if you felt that in part, but you're also fighting for the Gracie name.
Speaker A: Yeah. In our hometown, the greatest. Where the Gracie really stacked.
Speaker B: Gracie competitor of all time, arguably, in the hometown. I mean, okay.
Speaker A: All my family, my best friends, my friends, everybody watching, everybody there. There was a lot of pressure. A lot.
Speaker B: And then were you thinking that you would be able to submit him?
Speaker A: No. It's at that point, like, I don't predict how the fight will go, that I never did, because it is unpredictable. I never tried to set any strategy for any fight. I think, oh, okay. That I did, but that was the only time that I set any strategy into a fight. There was a 15 minutes fight there, and I said, first five minutes, I'm gonna play defense. He's bigger, stronger, younger. I don't want to play his game. And I know he comes in very fast. Every single fight he had, you know, he comes very aggressive. So my strategy, walking to the fight, I say, five minutes, I'm going to play defense. I'm not going to try to attack. I'm not going to try to match his pace. I already expected, you know, maybe I'm going to start losing the fight because, you know, if he comes in, there's a risk of me maybe getting take down. You know, something happened. I'm like, I'm gonna stick to the game plan. Five minutes, I'm gonna start picking up the pace. Cause then it's ten minutes to go. Which ten minutes? A long fight. So I don't need to start fast, but I'm gonna start being more aggressive and then, you know, try to take him down, up hookah. You know, by then I'm like, that's as far as strategy goes.
Speaker B: So no specific. Stay in the feet. Were you comfortable being both bottom and top in this? Strategically?
Speaker A: I'm always comfortable being borrowed top. I prefer to be on top because being in the bottom, the person on top dictates the pace of the fight because he's on top over you. So I always prefer to be on top because I can dictate the pace, I can implement my own pace. And being the bottom, they can slow me down so it's harder. So if I can choose, I will always be on top. But I think by then I was like, it's, you know, five minutes. Hit it. I'm like, he's pretty big and strong. I'm going to spend a lot of energy taking him down. I forgot.
Speaker B: How did it, how did it feel? So here you're stepping in, by the way, puzzle, maths. This is old school. As old school as it gets. So calm and relaxed here for people just listening. We're watching the early minutes of the match.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: So just feeling it out. He seems pretty calm, too. He must be nervous, too. I wonder how. Do you ever talk to him? You guys are friends?
Speaker A: Yeah, yeah, we're friends.
Speaker B: Did he ever say how nervous he was?
Speaker A: No, we never spoke about that fight.
Speaker B: No.
Speaker A: No.
Speaker B: He probably lays late at night thinking about it.
Speaker A: Maybe. I don't know, that sob. Yeah. I mean, so you see, the first five minutes he kept, I knew what he was going to do. In my study, his game, his stand up is most basic. Is basic in takedowns, leg attacks, double leg. So he goes single, double, and he charged in. That is pretty much his stand up game.
Speaker B: See what you get? You get a grip.
Speaker A: Yeah, that we got penalized.
Speaker B: So do you like to use the. Do you like to post with your left? You have a right foot forward.
Speaker A: Usually you're righty right, I'm ready, but I know he wants my leg, so I'm playing my stance just because of his game. All my grips at the first five minutes was to kind of try to neutralize his attacks.
Speaker B: So he wants to get your left leg.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Yeah. Right there.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: So how hard is that to stop that?
Speaker A: I mean, he felt pretty strong coming in some, you know, pushing the head down, trying to play with his balance.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: If you see it? There was a pause. Go back there. He charged in. There's a pause. Me standing in front of him.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: I did that on purpose.
Speaker B: What do you mean?
Speaker A: Just in front of him? Because, you know, he tried.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: And I'm like, you fail. I'm here.
Speaker B: There's a. Okay. So you could feel the frustration.
Speaker A: I could feel his frustration. Not be able to take me down.
Speaker B: Okay. So now. And this is just psychological battles.
Speaker A: And you see me walking straight into the middle of the mat, and he's circling out.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: See, I'm going very slow recovering, and.
Speaker B: He'S computing like shit.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: Because he just made an effort trying to take me down. He needs to recover. And I mean, you need to recover. The other guys there waiting for you.
Speaker B: And do I go for another takedown? Cause this one failed. Do I need to recalculate the strategy?
Speaker A: Yeah. And he kept trying over and over again and keep failing. I think that frustrated him a lot on that fight. I felt him kind of slowing down on the league because he was getting nowhere.
Speaker B: So we're five minutes in. Yeah, he keeps. So you never got that takedown in the. In the early.
Speaker A: No.
Speaker B: Let's see. So at this point, do you pull guard? Yeah. Okay.
Speaker A: So that's when I felt like he's. He's mentally, he's. He's not. He's worried now.
Speaker B: Did you try to pull close guard here?
Speaker A: No, I knew he was gonna bring Danny in the.
Speaker B: Okay. Cause that's the defense against pulling close guard.
Speaker A: Yeah, but I like that.
Speaker B: What do you.
Speaker A: I like people bringing the knee between my legs. Cause, see, I'm gonna close my guard even with his legging.
Speaker B: Okay. He's stopping the CLo.
Speaker A: Well, this is awkward, but I was holding his arm. That's why he felt he had no hand to post.
Speaker B: Got it. But still, it puts a leg in. But you're able to close your guard around.
Speaker A: Is you're okay with that? I do that really well. I sweep people from that position a lot.
Speaker B: What's the sweep?
Speaker A: I guess it's just pushed.
Speaker B: Okay. It's just a push, like, to your left side?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Okay. Because he has no. Oh, it's almost like. You mean you're basically around his back a little bit. Drag situation.
Speaker A: He knew that. Like, I swapped a lot of people with that sweep. So you see he kept leaning to his left. To my right.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: So I want to push them to my left. So you see him leaning over to my right a lot.
Speaker B: What's the right answer for him to, like, roll or something.
Speaker A: No, I mean, he's stuck. He does not really. He's stuck there. But the one thing he did, he kept off me completely. See that? He's leaning like he's too afraid of my attack now because he should lean on me. You know, you should bring the fight to me. So when I felt him, you know, like, I knew he was like, he's too worried about my attacks now.
Speaker B: Oh, yeah, that's right. So he can't. Yeah, if he comes back to the center, he has no.
Speaker A: So he's not engaging at that time. He's 100% just defending. So I felt that I'm like, he doesn't want to engage and he's looking. I knew at that point he wants my foot. Cause our first fight, I had the same position. I wasn't holding his arm, and he went to attack my foot, which he did. You know, he got into like a toehold or what.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: Yeah. So I know he's looking at my foot.
Speaker B: Which foot? Sorry, the left foot.
Speaker A: My right. Yeah, my right foot.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: I'm holding his arm.
Speaker B: And now you're going to the back as an arm drag type of thing.
Speaker A: So the moment that I came off, now I'm holding his arm so he cannot come up. So, you know, I'm holding his left arm so he cannot post a hand on the floor and come up.
Speaker B: And he's holding your right to try to get you. Yeah, basically to prevent you from attacking.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Oh, that's an interesting. And he rolls.
Speaker A: Yeah, he tried to, he tried to get me off balance. So see, now I'm switching. I switched the grip on his arm so I can free my left arm.
Speaker B: Can I ask you a question? Like, was there a chance he sweeps you here?
Speaker A: I mean, there's always a chance, but very hard. Yeah, but see, my left arm is free.
Speaker B: Oh, so you can post.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Why was your left arm free? Oh, cuz you're using you two. Got it, got it.
Speaker A: Okay, now I tried the hook. Now you will see you still got your own. What? Yeah, but when I knew he's his panicking because he didn't move that, he completely opened himself up. Like I'm holding his left arm. So by holding their arm, he's. That prevents him from defending the hook on that side because his arm is being held across. So the arm cannot block the hook. And I mean the hook with your left leg. Yeah. So you see when he come up. But I would say, I mean, that's my guess. But bushish is he's a big guy, you know, he was like 110 kilos. 112, something like that, which is 245.
Speaker B: Yeah. Right.
Speaker A: Yeah. So what were you at the time?
Speaker B: Less.
Speaker A: 220. Yeah, 220.
Speaker B: A nice, slim 100 kilo. Okay.
Speaker A: Yeah. So, you know, his defense are not amazing. He's good, but, you know, he's not known to have amazing defense. So by being the big guy in the room, when you train, you used to get out of situations because of your size. You shake people off. You know, it's because of your size. You shake them off. You get off some bad positions, you can. I mean, I could feel on the first fight, I'm side control, you know, suddenly he explode out. So, you know, you. I've seen him doing that a few of his fights. No, not in the most technical way. Just, I'm getting out. And he did because of his size, so. And he did the same thing. Like he tried to stood up. When I'm on his back, he completely opened up the hooks. He will see the next move. His head gonna come up and he gonna try to get off the floor.
Speaker B: So basically come up, shake you off kind of strategy.
Speaker A: There was no difference for the hooks. I put both hooks in straight away.
Speaker B: Oh, his arm is.
Speaker A: Yeah, I'm off balance. Yeah, see, I didn't bring him up. He came up.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: And now I'm attacking his neck and he's worried about the hooks. That's fatal mistake. That's like defense always come first. Remember what I just said now, defense first came second. So he's not worried more about the points than his neck. So it was like a progression of mistakes. That's why I think he got frustrated when he couldn't take me down. And then when I pull guard, he was, he was frustrated that the fight wasn't going his way. You know, he's very good about taking down. He tried over and over again for five minutes.
Speaker B: And here he was frustrated about the hooks. So he's like, it's almost like the frustration. Things like, no, no, these hooks shouldn't be here.
Speaker A: Like, I pull guard on the grips that I want. He's not comfortable inside my guard. He's not in the position that he wants to be. He's overleaning to his left. You know, he's not engaging or trying to pass. He's trying to get the foot, but his arm is trapped. He's gonna get nowhere. And then when I swapped him, suddenly his words are collapsing. You know, he couldn't take me down. I pulled out Armstrong. He tried to roll me over. No, he didn't get me anywhere. The first movement that he tried to escape, I'm on his back. I mean, now he's lost.
Speaker B: Yeah, that if you just go back to him standing up.
Speaker A: See, both hook goes in no defense. Like, there was nothing on the way of those hooks because he tried to come up.
Speaker B: He's coming up. You're high enough on him to where the weight was just probably immense. It just felt too heavy. And you're already going for the choke.
Speaker A: Of course. There's no time to lose.
Speaker B: Look at that.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: So you're not, like, worried I'm gonna get shaken off.
Speaker A: You're going for the chip.
Speaker B: You got your right hand.
Speaker A: No. Shaking me off. I'm on your back. Now.
Speaker B: We're in this together, and your right hand is opening up the lapel.
Speaker A: My right hand is holding his arm. I still holding the sleeve.
Speaker B: Oh, sorry.
Speaker A: You're holding the sleeve, but holding the sleeve. And I'm already going for the neck because it's timing.
Speaker B: At which point do you let go of the sleeve and open up, help with the lapel, or do you not need it?
Speaker A: No, I did that. But first I want to try to make a grip. Like, then I need to establish control before I let go, his arm got it. So I kept holding that a bit longer, and then when I fell. Okay. I have a good control over the back. Then I let go.
Speaker B: Do you? Okay, so you have, like, a light grip on his lapel, but you're thinking.
Speaker A: You know, I need to adjust that.
Speaker B: You need to adjust. You're, like, holding it there, and you're thinking, okay, at some point, I need to adjust.
Speaker A: All I need. All I want is to get under his chin. Then I know. I mean, it's. Now I can go for it. Cause if it's over, there's no choke. Right. I need. The wrist needs to be under.
Speaker B: Can you choke bushes over the.
Speaker A: No, I can't. That's just not right.
Speaker B: Okay. Anyway, it's not right or it doesn't work?
Speaker A: Both. It's not right and doesn't work. I mean, would you tap to a choke on your chin? No, just pressure. You hurt, but it's not gonna choke you out.
Speaker B: I don't know. I don't know. I'm not. Let me argue this. I love this. Arguing with Hodgka, Gracie about jokes. This is great. Okay. Like, clock choke. It was always interesting to me. Cause in judo, it's illegal to have the gear on face. And so it was kind of liberating for me to be allowed to have a gear on the face. No, it's just liberating. No, you don't have to worry about it. Of course, it's more effective to go under the chin, but I'm surprised just because the amount of pressure, it's all.
Speaker A: About how much you can take it. You can take a lot, but it feels like. No, it doesn't feel comfortable. I mean, sometimes on your mouth, it cuts your mouth. Now you bleeding. It feels horrible.
Speaker B: No, but that's not the feeling. The feeling. It might not be a joke, but the feeling, like it's a pressure that.
Speaker A: Everything'S just closing in, but it doesn't take you anywhere. Like, you're not gonna go to sleep.
Speaker B: You might not go to sleep.
Speaker A: So it's just pressure.
Speaker B: Yes.
Speaker A: So pressure. It hurts, is uncomfortable, but it's not gonna break your face, and it's not gonna put you to sleep. So if I don't get the neck, I don't go for the kill.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: I'm like. I'm holding his collar. You know, my wrist is almost under. It's. You know, I'm trying to kind of dig in. Got it. If I can dig in, then I will adjust the collar. But first I need to dig in.
Speaker B: Dig in first, then adjust. Can you do all that with one hand or. No?
Speaker A: I did.
Speaker B: So you can tighten the choke with just one hand?
Speaker A: No, I need the second one to open the lapel.
Speaker B: To open the lapel. But you're, like, digging in with one hand?
Speaker A: I'm digging in under the chin.
Speaker B: Under the chin?
Speaker A: Under his under. Now I need to go deeper.
Speaker B: But that the going deeper requires the second hand.
Speaker A: He does.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: It does.
Speaker B: But that requires you letting go of the other hand.
Speaker A: Yeah, I have to let go eventually. Yeah. See?
Speaker B: All right, yeah. Well, that's over.
Speaker A: Yeah, because I'm already under his. Like, the first hand got under ditching.
Speaker B: Do you need the hand and the second lapel?
Speaker A: Of course. Otherwise, he turns and he's out.
Speaker B: That's the control of the turning versus the tightening of the choke.
Speaker A: Yeah, it does both. It helps tighten the collar and stop the person rolling out.
Speaker B: Were you feeling pretty good about this position?
Speaker A: Yes, I just felt it's getting tighter, tighter, tighter, tighter. Because it wasn't super tight from the beginning. It wasn't, like, the perfect choke. So we're still. I mean, I knew it was like, it's very close to the end, but, you know, I still need the. Just there was still the risk of maybe escaping.
Speaker B: Is it possible for his head to slip out?
Speaker A: Possible, yes. But I'm closing that gap.
Speaker B: Yeah, I hear. What did that feel like? Relief.
Speaker A: Relief. Like, awesome. Amazing.
Speaker B: Somebody on Reddit asked, ask him about the cross grip he used to sweep, followed with a genius grip switch when Buchesha was inverted. Did you use a cross grip when you sweep? Did you?
Speaker A: I guess the cross grip in the arm. That must be.
Speaker B: Oh, that's the cross grip. Okay. What's the genius behind that? Or was that just, do you like that kind of. That kind of grip?
Speaker A: Yeah, because I always like close guard, and no one wants to be in anyone's close guard, right? It's open guard. It's step to pass. So everybody, when you try to close the guard, they bring the knee in the middle. Like, if you. If. If you're not standing, if you lower on the ground and they open guard, if you're close to me, you need that knee between. So it is a must. That's when I start developing the attack. You know, I managed to have long legs to close my legs around people, even with that, and then I just developed that sweep.
Speaker B: When did you start developing that?
Speaker A: Like, I don't remember when, but I would say before black belt.
Speaker B: Okay, so your answer to that is not to figure out how to prevent them from putting the knee in. Is there an answer to that?
Speaker A: No. The good guys will always, no, you can't get the knee, remove that leg out of the way. That's not possible.
Speaker B: Well, maybe off balance them enough to where there's not.
Speaker A: No.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: I mean, you can try, but, like, it's hard. If you cannot balance, you sweep them.
Speaker B: Right. So that means gonna. So you have to sweep.
Speaker A: That's a full sweep. Yeah, because that's extremely common to have that. I mean, I. If I'm on your guard, open guard, you know, if you have your legs, if I'm between both of your legs in the open guard, my knee will be between your legs because it's a must. My knee cannot be on the floor.
Speaker B: Since Hanzo was there. What did he tell you before?
Speaker A: I think just motivate you. I think that Hanzo always did that fantastically well to motivate me. Like, before I fight a match, I think that, you know, the confidence, you know, his, you know, his energy being around you, it's. I think that's the. Is the great thing. To have hands on your corner is the motivation that he gives you.
Speaker B: What did you learn about Jiu jitsu in life from Hansel Gracie? We got to hang out with him in Vegas a little bit. He's a character. He's one of the historic coaches and jiu jitsu competitors, but also personalities in the martial arts world, in the world in general. There's very few like him.
Speaker A: Hans is a fantastic person. It's, you know, what I've learned most from him is, like, you can't take any challenge. It doesn't matter when, wherever, who. It's, you know, you have to be ready. And, you know, with that war spirit that he has, you know, he always took any challenge, ready or not ready.
Speaker B: Was it you that said it or he said it? Where? Not until you go in, you know, to do something difficult, do you discover the strength that you have. So, like, if you really think about it, you might think that you're not good enough. You don't have the strength to take on something difficult.
Speaker A: I fully agree. I think we are measured not when we're on the strongest, but when we are on the weakest. That's when we truly measure ourselves or character, who we are not. We're in a position of power when we're in a position of weakness.
Speaker B: Have you surprised yourself, like, how damn good you are? Like, is this. Is this really how good I am in this situation where in retrospect, you might think, how the hell was I able to accomplish this?
Speaker A: Not how good I am, because otherwise I wouldn't be there. So, you know, being there in the first place, it's already not a great thing. But I say, you know, every single time I found myself there, I was super proud that I've never cracked. Like, I've never gave up, ever, any second, any fight, never.
Speaker B: Never been broken in competition.
Speaker A: Never even. It's not about winning or losing. It's about you giving up. I've never doubted myself. I always fought to the very end, always, that I'm most proud of, because there was moments, you know, it's. You're in a terrible position. You know, mainly, like, there was moments that I was super tired, but, like, exhaustive tired, when it was easy to give up, like, I had nothing more to give, but I pushed. I took energy out of my soul, I would have to say. Cause when my body had zero, you know, my spirit, my soul, pull it out.
Speaker B: Is that in part, just not allowing yourself to have to ever, ever quit?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: I have one other thing I regret. I remember, like, a blue belt match, I remember. I'm not gonna say who it was against, but I remember just being extremely exhausted and just constantly fighting. A guy was really good mount, really good guard passing, and I just remembered him passing my guard eventually towards this, like a finals of one of the IBGF tournaments and then right away going to mount and just, I don't know, I, the level of frustration. I mean, I quit at that point. I remember that still, like, I, it's not about losing, winning or losing, but I just remember I was like, I was like teary eyed frustrated. And then I knew there was a lot of fights still left, even in there somewhere. And I quit. And I regret that to this day. I think the reason I regret that is because it gave me an option to now quit. In every other aspect of life, this is an option.
Speaker A: Yeah, it is.
Speaker B: It sucks.
Speaker A: Yeah. It teaches you, you know, it makes us stronger. I think it made you stronger.
Speaker B: Yeah. It makes you stronger that you did that to learn that. Don't do that again. But still, like you said, just going to sleep in training. I do think it made me weaker. It did make me weaker in the rest of my life, too. Those, you know, I've quit a few times in my life on small things and you realize, okay, it's not that big of a deal. It's fine. Like, who cares? But that, what you learn over time is that voice always comes there. Obviously. Maybe it does for you, too, even at the highest level of, like, it's not that big of a deal. Like, it's okay to quit here. Like, it makes sense. Everybody would understand, you know, in some sense, like, you're, you know, many people would say you're past your prime in this match with the progestia. Like, it makes sense. You've been focusing on MMA. Makes sense. Makes sense to lose. Yeah, I don't know. That's a weird voice. And in some sense it's that voice. And a voice that says, like, why are you doing this? Like, this is silly. Doesn't make any sense. It's just stop. Just stop. Just stop. And shutting that voice down and never allowing yourself to quit, that's a really powerful thing. Like everybody I've met, everybody that's successful. Yeah. Down to the. Even engineers, CEO's Elon Musk. Just never quitting. Like when everybody around you, it says quit. Never quitting. It's weird. I don't know what that is. Might be genetic. It might be like using the stubbornness to just never allow yourself to develop that. Basically developing a calluses to that voice that tries to tell you to quit. You never quit. Huh? What would you attribute that to?
Speaker A: It's like how much you want to get to the destination you chose. Like, you know, it's how badly you want to get there. It's. If you quit, you're never gonna get there.
Speaker B: And you always wanted to?
Speaker A: I always wanted to.
Speaker B: Is there some thing you remember from that match? Some things that happened before and after that stand out to you? Just since in Rio?
Speaker A: Yeah, there was an interview, you know, like, prior to the fight, there was a big fight. We were doing, like, media every day before, me and him. We were meeting for media, and, like, five days before, you know, five, six days before. I'm quite chatty. It's, you know, the closer we get to the fight, the more focus I get, the less I stop joke around playing, you know, with people. But I remember, I think it was maybe three or four days before we were doing an interview together. I think my cousin Kira was there. She was doing one of the interviews with us, and I don't remember exactly what we were talking about, but I just remember we were talking about the fight, of course, and then it was standing beside each other, and I'm like. And then suddenly I chopped, and I grabbed him by the neck. I said, well, I'm gonna tap YoU by the neck. And then he's like, you know, very shy. And then I let go. I said, no, I'm gonna tap YoU by the arm. And I could FeEL he was, like he wasn't comfortable, you know, with being there. It always, you know, me saying that I'm gonna tap him out there was, like, I was so relaxed joking ABOut it, but I'm joking that I'm gonna tap him out in a fight that we're gonna have in four days time. And, yeah, I felt he was, like, not comfortable at all.
Speaker B: Do you think you got in his head a little bit? It gave you a little bit of confidence?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: You said that Jiu jitsu is a reflection of your personality. So both your Jiu jitsu and your personality, there's a calmness. What is that? Why are you so calm? Is there, like, an ocean underneath that's boiling? Is this developed, or is this your personality? Are you basically leveraging who you are already to develop a game around the Jiu jitsu, or did Jiu jitsu make you calm?
Speaker A: I think both. I was always very calm since I was a kid, since very young. I was never very fiery person. So that is a reflection. It reflected on my juju. So my life, on my fights, the way I fight. So it's a direct influence of my personality, and I think it's also in the day, you know, you develop, the more you practice, the more you fight. It's like, you know, you don't want to get nervous. You don't want the adrenaline. And so you just learn how to shut that off from your mind. So the less I thought about it, you know, it's like how many times I fought, you know, let's say the week before the fight, that's when you start more, when you concern the most, because now it's getting very close. Before it's just far away. You know, it's. It's normal to think of the tournament. You get a bit nervous, but it goes away quick. But the fight, you know, the week before now you're constantly thinking of that day. And every time you think adrenaline pumps in, your heart accelerate. You know, it doesn't. You know, it makes it. It's like, why am I feeling this? What difference will it make? So you kind of. You're shutting that thought out of your mind because you don't want to feel the adrenaline, your heart accelerating. It's not going to add you anything. So it's, you know, it's the practice also that I think it helped me to shut that off my mind.
Speaker B: Has that helped you in regular life?
Speaker A: Yeah, of course. It's, you know, suddenly when you go into any situation that might be stressful, you know, like an important meeting. No, super. Whatever it is, it's like, how much would you worry about that before? Worry is not going to help you anywhere. It's the opposite. Just going to make you more nervous. Your heart rate accelerate. Your ability to think clearly is going to be damaged by that. So it's like the more calm, the more relaxed you are, the better you can think of.
Speaker B: Do you ever get angry? Yeah, like in traffic. Do you ever get, like, not calm, just like you're screaming?
Speaker A: Not. Not in a screaming sit?
Speaker B: No, but just angry. What does angry look like? Is it still calm?
Speaker A: Yeah, like, you know, a few seconds of complaining, but then it goes away.
Speaker B: Have you ever, like, thrown a cell phone at a wall or something like that?
Speaker A: No, I never get that angry because that's just silly. It's like, it's. It's. If I would have done that, I would not be able to control my emotions prior to a fight. That would be a reflection. Letting yourself lose, losing control, that will reflect other times.
Speaker B: Do you think it has, in part, made you more emotionally closed off from the world? It's harder for you to be vulnerable.
Speaker A: To others, probably, yeah. But I heard there are few times I'm emotionally close. Yeah, maybe. I think that influenced it. Yeah.
Speaker B: Have you ever cried in a movie?
Speaker A: Yeah. For, not for many years before. I think maybe I'm getting older. Do you remember the movie something? I mean, it's, no, I mean, is it the notebook? I mean, I would say the last few years I've been crying more than before for some reason. I don't know why. Like, silly movies, like nothing suddenly brings tears to my eyes.
Speaker B: Yeah, well, I've already, just having met you and interacted with you, I can see that you're kind of opening your heart and mind to the world. You could see like, here's this historically great athlete now. Like, the wars have been fought and you're now, like, waking up to the world.
Speaker A: It's cool to see probably I'm bringing my guard down now. I don't have to get up on it.
Speaker B: You can even do some podcasts. You said you watched, like, movies beforehand sometimes mentioned Braveheart. What were you doing? Did you watch something beforehand, like the day before?
Speaker A: I used to, yeah. There was like, I think Braveheart and Gladiator. I mean, there's a few others that I've always watched the day before. Cause the day before is to do nothing. I just want to be at home in bed watching tv, like saving energy, stretching by myself. So it's like, it's just want to save energy. I don't waste my energy going out, going around. So, you know, those are the movies that I always like to watch. Kind of trying to bring some, you know, hyper excitement. Like, you know, I'm getting ready tomorrow. So I'm like, let me watch some movies that, like, brought, you know, some, that warrior spirit into me?
Speaker B: Yeah. What is that about human nature? Braveheart I love even more. Should you put your life on the line for a thing that matters or run away just so you can live? It's like running. You may live, but like years from now, when you look back at this moment, would you trade all the days just to come back to this moment.
Speaker A: And tell the English, you could take.
Speaker B: Our lives, but you can't take our freedom? I mean, oh, man, what is that about human nature? Is there some aspect of, like, the glory you were able to achieve being more important than anything else? There's some aspect of that, that's greatness.
Speaker A: Yeah, I never pursue glory, so it just came, it came with it, but that was never my goal. I never care for glory.
Speaker B: Were you able to experience, like, like, I'm at the height of this thing, whatever, whatever humanity is able to achieve in various things. Holy shit, I'm flying.
Speaker A: I felt like no, one can touch me. I can destroy people. Yeah.
Speaker B: Prolonged periods of time or just momentarily.
Speaker A: I always knew from before I got to a black belt I can be great because I used to train with the best in the world for many years and I used to see my progression and everybody else. So I knew I was getting somewhere. I knew I could be the best and that was also my goal since very, very young. And I always believed that I could be. And that over the years that kept telling me over and over again because I'm getting better and better faster than everybody else, so I just need to carry on with what I'm doing.
Speaker B: But I think you've said that you wanted to and maybe you thought you could be the greatest of all time. Like at the very beginning, like when you sucked.
Speaker A: Yeah, yeah. Not the greatest of all time because I never really thought about that, but I thought, I'm gonna be the best in the world when I sucked. When I sucked.
Speaker B: So, okay, so what is that? What is that like, that self belief? Is there a component to that self belief being a prerequisite?
Speaker A: It's difficult to say because that was a decision, I think, like, why did I believe I could be? I can't tell you that because I don't know.
Speaker B: But you think you decided to be?
Speaker A: I decided to be. I decided to be and I believed I could.
Speaker B: You think there was like a day somewhere when you were young where you're like, huh, you're sitting on a couch eating cheetos.
Speaker A: I don't think it was a day like a moment because for many years is I wasn't really training much as a child, you know, I've done a bit of. I used to train and then stop, done a bit of judo. Never stay away from it much. But until, you know, like from ten to 14, I barely trained jiu jitsu so much. I used to. There was no Gracie school near where I used to live. And I was doing. There was a judo school. I used to go twice a week. I went to Judy's tournament. I lost in 5 seconds, left crying. The guy pulled me in 5 seconds. Anyway, so when I was 14 I went to the south of Brazil to see my uncle Helen to spend summer holidays. I was there for like four weeks, I think. And when I got there, my cousin Hollis were living with him. Hollis, like bigger than me. It was. I think it's four years, four years older. So I was 14, I was already 18. 1718 purple belt competitor and I think that was the first time in my life that I felt what it mean what it meant to be a gracie in terms of having a school, teaching, training, you know, living that, you know, jujitsu lifestyle, what a gracie meant to be. And I've just, I've loved that. I was out of shape. My uncle was like, you know, incentivizing me to lose weight to train. But you're not training. Why? You know, it's like you've got a shape, you need to diet. So I used to run every day. I was eating super well. I start, you know, I start that when I start changing. So when I go back to Rio, I was super motivated to follow up, carry on. And he, you know, he invited me to go back there to live with him, but I couldn't. It was too soon to change schools and everything. My mom said no, but maybe next year, if you want to go, you can. So I kept that in my mind. Next year I moved to the south to live with him. I was 15 and it was him. My uncle Helen and my uncle Carlin. They both used to live very close to each other. They also have their own schools close to each other. So I was with both and I stayed there for almost a year. You know, I was the youngest in the academy. There was some, you know, blue, purple bells, normal guys, but they're already competing, training ahead of me. And I just joined the group of training that didn't compete while I was there because there was no competition that then and I wasn't really ready. But it's not about competing, it's more about the training. And I start training every day, start improving. And a year after that, when I came back to Rio, I was already on a mission. I was like, I love this. I'm just carry on training every day with my uncle Carlos, Carlos Gracie Junior, Gracie Baja. And when I got there, I was training a little bit there before, but just 1415. But when I got there, there was a, you know, there was one of, that was one of the most competitors, one of the biggest jujitsu schools at the time. There were so many high level world champions, competitors in every single belt. And I've kind of joined in with that and I've carried on. I don't remember when, but I remember, you know, looking and saying, I'm gonna be the best in the world. But I used to be. I was at the bottom of the stairs, you know, no one really believed me. I didn't shout, you know, to disguise, but, you know, I told a few people, I'm like, I'm gonna be the best. And that's. I think I was just losing. But I've never ever doubt, I've never diverted from that mission.
Speaker B: I would say, did anyone believe you when you said you can be great?
Speaker A: Nobody.
Speaker B: Didn't matter.
Speaker A: Didn't matter. I don't care.
Speaker B: I don't need even people that, like, love you.
Speaker A: Everybody. My mom, my dad. I mean, no one thought, no one in my family thought I was gonna be here today. Nobody. Because I just started late. I've never had any start that people. Oh, that kid's gonna be really good. You know, I was a chubby kid that didn't barely train. I mean, people used to look at me, he just another grace. He does, you know? Well, more.
Speaker B: What do you learn from that? Do you think most people lose that self belief they quit when everyone around them doesn't believe?
Speaker A: Yeah. I think if those that need approval. Yes, I see.
Speaker B: You shouldn't have approval.
Speaker A: I never need approval from anyone. I don't care if you leave me or not. If you. Not my problem.
Speaker B: It's tough. It's tough. I don't need approval. But you're surrounded by people older, wiser, better than you. And they're kind of directly or indirectly saying, you stop being silly, kid.
Speaker A: No, no one ever told me that because I. That was not something that I used to say all the time. I maybe said very, very few times.
Speaker B: I just thought, you know, maybe that's the secret.
Speaker A: Of course. I mean, if you start shouting, then you're just being silly. Then it's not what you really want. Then you're saying that for other reasons. If you say it over and over again. Because you shouldn't. I mean, why?
Speaker B: Well, to push back. One of the reasons you might want to say it is to find the right people that believe in you.
Speaker A: Yeah, but not if you say over and over again. Then it's just. Then you're just bragging. Sure, because one thing is to say it, but the other one is to do it. So it's, you know, you said it once or very few times, but now you have to do it. Saying it's not helping you. Getting there.
Speaker B: Was there sacrifices you had to make?
Speaker A: Everything, everything. That was my priority in life. Everything was secondary.
Speaker B: Like social life, career paths, everything. And from 14, 1516, as you get better and better and better and better, it was just becoming sharper, the focus on this thing.
Speaker A: Yeah, it's just over and over again, over and over again. It's, you know, it's just training, training, training. And I mean, how many times I lost I have no clue.
Speaker B: So on the mat, you were getting beat up.
Speaker A: I'm getting smashed by everybody. People my age, I was chubby. I was physically weak. I mean, I'm tall, but physically, I'm nothing physically strong. I'm normally strong for my size, but physically, if you want to measure strength, I'm weak because, you know, we can measure strength. Lifting weights. I'm weak. I don't lift. I lift weight same as people much lighter than me. Everybody, my weight lifts heavier weight.
Speaker B: And people that train with you often.
Speaker A: Talk about how strong they're super strong.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Because I generate a lot of strengthen I can create. I put myself in the right angles so that I can be strong. I'm not strong. And the only person who I listen to saying that is comprito one guy that I fought, Rodrigo Madeiros, I fought him a few times, and he's the only one that I heard saying about me that's like, no, Roger's not strong. He's not. He's technical, and he can create strength, but he's not strong.
Speaker B: He meant that as a compliment.
Speaker A: Yeah, I think so. No, I think he was honest, because I think he's the only one who could see that.
Speaker B: Yes.
Speaker A: So I think that's a compliment.
Speaker B: So he's technically really strong. So you had an incredible match with him.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Is there insight you have about how you went from a person who was not very good but had a dream, a confident dream, a vision, to somebody that was actually good? Was there something to the practice sessions? Were you getting reps on a specific techniques?
Speaker A: I'd never done anything special because, I mean, I'm in a gym training equally with everybody else, so I've never did anything on the side different than anybody else. So, you know, I was in the school training exactly the same way as everybody else.
Speaker B: Wow. In terms of schedule, yes. But what was. Can you reverse engineer what was going through your mind? Cause there's so many different ways to actually mentally approach the same exact training session.
Speaker A: I'm gonna try to beat you.
Speaker B: Okay. So in SOME part, it's competitive. Like, at the core of it is I want to be better than these particular people.
Speaker A: You're gonna keep beating me, I'm gonna keep coming back at you.
Speaker B: And to do that, I have to solve problems. I have to figure out how to do stuff.
Speaker A: Well, you catch me once, I'm gonna keep on coming, trying to not get caught on that.
Speaker B: At which point did you develop a game that was basically the famous white belt game of the very basics the very fundamentals of jiu jitsu, like saying, I'm going to beat you.
Speaker A: Never. There was never a conscious decision to try to have a basic juju first. I think there's a big misconception. There's misconception. My jujitsu is not basic.
Speaker B: It's a hodgepaccuracy.
Speaker A: It's not basic. It's not old school. I think people, they Just DOn't see that. It's extremely complex in a way that is, people, they cannot copy. I teach people, I can teach you the cross color joke, but the one thing that people, they don't realize is not the move is you need to practice the move until you learn. Is the practice over and over again. Like, it took me years. When I say years, I'm like, years after I was a black belt, I was able to choke people out with a cross color, choke in them out effectively years after I got my black belt. So that's something that you learn first day, first week, so I can teach you. It makes no difference. You know the theory, but until you apply the enum, you help you. Of course, the more details you learn, you know, the more tools you have to practice. But it's still very complex because it's not about the move itself. It's about how can you control the movement of the other person. He's resisting, you're blocking, you cannot predict what he would do. And he's doing a whole bunch of moves to block you. Every single move you do a step of the way, because it's a progression of move from beginning to end till I apply the choke. It's a progression of move. And there's not one way to get that. There's many ways, because how many ways can you block? You can put your arm in every single angle. We have both arms you can bridge. So it's dealing with all that. That is the complexity of the position, but that goes for everything. Like, every single move, my strong moves, I would say it took me years developing them, years. So it's. And you're going to tell me that's basic, so go try and do it. What the other person is defending, that's the thing, because most of the things that I do, I've been doing them for years and they know that I'm going to do, and I can still get it. Most of the times that's the hardest is when they know what's coming and you can still do it.
Speaker B: And you said that the way you're able to do that, you just have to do it right.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: What do you learn by doing all the steps along the way? And just for people who don't know, cross collar choke from the mount. So jiu jitsu starts in a neutral place. There's people on their feet, and then you either, then you get to the ground somehow, and then there's the person on top and on bottom. Then there's a guard with the legs between the two people. And then you can get past the guard. As you get past the guard and you into side control and so on, you get more and more and more dominant positions. And so Mount is considered to be one of the most dominant positions. It's when you're past their legs sitting on top of their stomach, putting pressure on them, and cross collar choke is using their jacket to. How would you explain that to choke?
Speaker A: To have the collars? I put my both hands on your collars, and when I squeeze, you press your neck so it blocks the venue. You go to sleep. So it's a. You choke people with your hands in your wrist. You put them, you know, you grab the hollow, so you get your wrists around people's neck and you squeeze.
Speaker B: Yeah. The discovery of that is fascinating. I mean, because it's interesting. It's like, you know, you can imagine there's all kinds of ways to choke a human being. What animals do it with their, like, mouth, right? They put, like, their jaws around the. In the fact that you can kind of discover this methodology of the right kind of positioning, and then it becomes an art form, like, of why this? Why not this, right? Or why not this? Or something? Like, to figure out, I think we.
Speaker A: Practiced that will come easy over time.
Speaker B: You figure out what works and what not you. And then, and then more further and further details and subtleties start to emerge anyway on that process of beating, of being able to beat some of the best people in the world and the thing they know is coming. What is. What's the difference between the white belt doing that and Hadro Gracie doing that? The thing that's so hard to explain, what do you think you're picking up? Is it some tiny, tiny details of muscle movements?
Speaker A: It is. It's many tiny details because it's the whole movement itself is the perception from beginning to end. Like every step of that movement, it's important and precise. So it's, you know, you miss one detail on the way, you collapse. So when I say that with the black belt, the black belt has no control over the whole movement, he's thinking beginning and end. So he goes straight you know, straight to your neck. Regardless, he cannot read the other person. If it's, you know, if it's time to let go, if it's the time to go for a neck, should I be pushing here before I get my hand in? You know, is this the right time to go deep, or should I deal with this first before the second hand?
Speaker B: That's at the beginning, since the white belt. At the very beginning of the journey.
Speaker A: Yeah, the white belt. Did you think finished.
Speaker B: Yeah. And then as you get progress, you see that there's, like, this giant tree of possibilities that you're almost feeling your way down. I mean, would you be able to teach expl. Do you even know what you're doing by the details? Okay, but it's hard to convert into words, probably.
Speaker A: No, it's possible. Then you don't know what you're doing.
Speaker B: So what is. What are some most important details that you could say? Maybe positioning of the hand, the gripping. Is it the positioning of your body, the posture? Is there some interesting, like, insights is.
Speaker A: A combination because first you have to put your body in a very strong position that you don't require your hands to hold them out. So the choke is. That's first, because I cannot use my hands on the floor to stop you escaping.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: So if I have to, my body has to handle that the way I position myself. I have to do it in a way that don't require my hands for balance.
Speaker B: Okay. Why is the mouth such a dominant position? Doesn't make any sense. Right. Like, you're just sitting on top of the stomach of a person.
Speaker A: It makes all sense if you think what's. Forget fighting, forget jujitsu. Like you've never trained. What's the one position, the most dominant position you can get over another human being? One the most for you. Which one? It is like the most dominant position that you can get over another human being.
Speaker B: So if we were just. Because the way I think about it is putting myself in, like, a six, seven, eight year old self without knowing any martial arts. And I had an older brother who'd beat the shit out of me. Yeah, it probably was Mao, but. Well, yes. Okay, so we both didn't know, but if we knew something, it'd probably be back control.
Speaker A: If in the back control, you're under the other person, do you think being under is the most dominant position? It can be over another person.
Speaker B: You mean like a back control?
Speaker A: If I'm on your back.
Speaker B: Oh, like that.
Speaker A: You can move, you can roll. I cannot stop you rolling. Yeah, maybe you can even stand up. How dominant is that?
Speaker B: Yeah, but if we're the same size, both untrained, if it doesn't matter. Have you seen kids? Do they do that? Okay. Mount looks and feels like dominance when you're two eight year olds fighting. Okay. I don't know. I don't know why it feels that way. It could be some animalistic thing. Maybe it is actual dominance. I don't know. But it feels like if you're untrained, you can just buck your way out of it. It feels unstable. It feels unstable to hold mouth unless you know what you're doing, right? No.
Speaker A: If you want to put both of your hands on the floor.
Speaker B: Yeah, just.
Speaker A: Just your hands. Do you think it's easy to take somebody off?
Speaker B: Yeah, maybe not.
Speaker A: Do you think it's easy to remove the hand and bring them out? The hands on the floor, arms straight. I'm leaning, and.
Speaker B: Yeah, you're right.
Speaker A: It's hard. I mean, you don't need to know fighting to hold yourself down.
Speaker B: Yeah, but you're right. When you take the arms off and balancing, then it gets tricky, because when you're trying to. I think what happens? I'm thinking back to eight year old, because my brother's five years older than me, and he would do the usual, like, stop hitting yourself thing, and I think he would be in mount, like, hitting me with my own hands at a place of love. Of course, I love him deeply, and it was very formative and positive experience for me. Okay. I think, yeah. The weakness is when he takes, when the person who has you, mount, takes their arms off to do something.
Speaker A: But even if you keep your hands up in the air. When I'm falling. Yeah, you can when I'm falling.
Speaker B: So I'm speaking about untrained people. I feel like they get greedy. They try to do stuff.
Speaker A: The other day, I watched my nine year old daughter.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: We're in a friend's house. There's a whole bunch of kids there. They playing. And when I looked, she's mounting a boy her age, her size. He cannot escape.
Speaker B: Wow. She probably seen.
Speaker A: No, she trains. She's been training for, I would say, a year and a half, which is not much. I mean, she's a nine year old daughter, a girl over a boy.
Speaker B: Has she seen footage of you? Maybe she picked up?
Speaker A: No, but she'd been training for a year and a half, so she has an idea what mount is. But, I mean, in terms of our skills, I never taught her them out. She had lessons at the academy, like any other kid.
Speaker B: Did she make him cry or.
Speaker A: No, but he couldn't escape. Which other position would she be able to hold? The boy in the back? He would roll her out.
Speaker B: That's true.
Speaker A: He couldn't come out from underneath her. They're kids. Like, there is no other most dominant position that you can pin the other person.
Speaker B: Couldn't you argue from that perspective? Side control?
Speaker A: No, no, because side control, you have to hold the other person, and it's. You're not free. You cannot release them.
Speaker B: But in side control, your hips are not on top of theirs. So they can't buck you off. Right. If you're holding them a little bit and you can hit them with one hand, his head is here.
Speaker A: You're gonna hurt him here by the time you're doing that. But then he has his arms free. And if he turn towards your legs, then he's away from your arms. He not even has the perfect angle. I mean, it is a good position. You can hit, you can dominate. But it's not the best position to be over the other person. He can knee you in the head at the same time. You punch him. Then there's a knee coming to your head.
Speaker B: I love playing devil's advocate with Hodge, Gracie, about two eight year olds fighting.
Speaker A: And your head is closer to his hand. Yeah, maybe he can throw you a punch.
Speaker B: All right.
Speaker A: Would you choose to be inside control of a mount, getting in the head?
Speaker B: Well, for a person who, in competition prefers neon belly over a mount. But that's my weakness. That's my failure as a human being. Holding mount can be tricky.
Speaker A: It's very hard. Of course it's hard. But what is easy? Tell me how easy?
Speaker B: Side control and neon belly is easier.
Speaker A: But neon belly is easy.
Speaker B: Easier? I'm not saying black belt level. I'm saying, well, maybe even black belt level.
Speaker A: Easier for what? To hold somebody?
Speaker B: To make them squirm and hurt. To create openings.
Speaker A: Never go to death with a big guy.
Speaker B: Yeah, you can.
Speaker A: You can't. Yeah, he's gonna push you back and come up in the mount. He can't sit up, not when he mounted him.
Speaker B: The thing is also about Mount is people on the bottom of Mount panic more so they fight harder.
Speaker A: They panic, they expose. It's the most exposure you have because the person's arms are free. You cannot touch him. His head is too high. There's nothing he can do. His legs won't get you anywhere. He might touch your lower back. It's like nothing you do. You most exposed being in the mouth. I'd rather you hold me. Side control. A thousand times the mount of me and having to look up for your fist coming down. Yeah, side control. I hug you, you cannot hurt me. Okay, hold me, but I'm hugging you. If I hug you tight, what can you do against me?
Speaker B: Hold. It seems maybe it's just from. And again, I'm arguing just for the fun of it, but it seems like a more difficult skill to learn to apply a huge amount of pressure and weight from mount.
Speaker A: You don't have to apply pressure and weight from out.
Speaker B: Not apply pressure, but be heavy. Right.
Speaker A: You don't necessarily need to be heavy.
Speaker B: You don't?
Speaker A: No.
Speaker B: Why do you, as people say, you feel extremely heavy?
Speaker A: If I'm putting, if I'm being heavy, I cannot attack. I have to choose. I can be heavy just to penalize, you know, just to pin them, take the energy out, you know, to make them suffer. But the moment that I decide to attack, I can only be heavy if I'm sitting up straight. That's when my all my weight can drop down. If I'm high, then I'm sitting on your chest and on your own solar plexus. That's the worst position to be. Sit at it on the person because that's where he breathed. So you're in a high mouth, sitting up straight. That's when you can. I can be very heavy. I can make people, you know, feel my weight and, you know, be very uncomfortable, but I'm not in a position to attack. The moment that I want to attack, my body has to lean forward. I have to approach the, you know, the neck or the arms. The moment that I do that, my weight comes off my hips, it goes to my knees. The weight is off you.
Speaker B: But at that point, if you have.
Speaker A: Now I'm attacking, I'm no longer heavy.
Speaker B: On you, but you want to be at that point to remove any of the defenses they have or some of the defenses by getting their elbows.
Speaker A: Now I'm like either getting in, trying to get your call, or bringing your elbow across to attack the amlock.
Speaker B: So what are some interesting details along the way that are tough to get to figure out? What were the big leaps for you from white belt to the best in the world?
Speaker A: It's you're trying to attack the neck, you know, putting one hand in the collar, you prying yourself that hand to place it on the floor. So now you're vulnerable to get bridged, to get rollover, because if your hands are free, trying to roll you over, you're stopped the moment they put your hand in the person's collar. Now, you have to be very careful with your body positioning. Very careful.
Speaker B: The distribution of the weight.
Speaker A: Yeah. And how, you know, how high you sit, you know how tall your upper body goes. And then the biggest challenge comes as you try the second hand. That's the, you know, for the, for the choke. That's the biggest challenge, the second hand, because you already have, you know, you already don't have one hand. Now you are trying the second hand. And if one of my hand is in you as a defending yourself. Have two hands. One hand is already on one side. This, this side is getting attack. You have two hands blocking that. I have one hand. There's no help for that hand. I cannot remove anything. That's the biggest challenge, getting one hand, getting past two, and not getting rollover.
Speaker B: But I also have to have two hands on bottom. I have two hands and can also turn, and I can do all kinds of stuff.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: And my whole mind and everything is focused on that second hand.
Speaker A: It's a big challenge. It's hard. Very hard.
Speaker B: Is there an art to getting the first hand into a place where you.
Speaker A: It's less of an art because it's easier. I'll say. Most times I get my first hand in is when you try some move, you're trying to escape, you're pushing. I get the first hand in as.
Speaker B: An opportunity, and it's gonna sit there for a while and now, and I.
Speaker A: Go as deep as I can. So the first hand, because the second hand is the hardest, I have to compensate the first hand to be as deep as I can. If I cannot get the first hand in deep, I won't try the second. I need that first hand deep. Then I go for the second, and.
Speaker B: It'S deep, and everything is, like, super tight.
Speaker A: Super tight. The first hand has to be super tight. Otherwise the chance of failing is very big.
Speaker B: Okay. Does the opponent usually feel like they're screwed at that point also?
Speaker A: No. As you put in the first hand, and the moment that I position myself just prior to attempt the second hand, I think the way I, my body is positioned, the way I'm collapsing with my weight, and they feel, it's like it's, I'm, you know, this is terrible. Yeah.
Speaker B: How long did it take you to figure out how to reposition your weight? Once the first hand is in the.
Speaker A: Very quickly because they get breached out.
Speaker B: Okay. So that there's a good feedback loop.
Speaker A: There because one mistake you out, like, one off, positioning you out but you.
Speaker B: Still have to do that against the best people in the world.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Where is the way out for most people? Like, if you were in mount against prochacia or some of the best defenses in the world.
Speaker A: The way out is to. Or the obsolescence to defend themselves and, you know, prevent the first hand to get deep. And I'll say the best thing that they could do is try to change my positioning on the mount in a way that, you know, push me to a very low mount, you know, try to just change the way I'm dominating you not to be, you know, get me off the high mount, pretty much.
Speaker B: Are you always, is it a slow, is it a fast thing to go from low to fast mount? A high mount?
Speaker A: Slow, very slow. Because I need to beat your arms because you're holding me down and the.
Speaker B: Arms need to come out.
Speaker A: It's a slow. It's a slow process.
Speaker B: Okay. And you just.
Speaker A: Is there like a. Yeah, so I use my legs against your arms?
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: So it's my legs pushing your arms.
Speaker B: But how do you get them? How do you get your legs into the elbows?
Speaker A: As long as it's, you know, it has to come under the tip of your elbow because now the legs will start forcing your arms up.
Speaker B: So your legs aren't, like, spread out there? No, they're in.
Speaker A: Your elbow cannot get inside my leg. That means I'm in a very low amount, and then I cannot attack because I cannot ignore that, because the moment that I attack, that will start pushing my leg to push me up.
Speaker B: What's the secret to getting the second hand in?
Speaker A: There's two ways. Either you go four fingers inside, which is the hardest, because with the moment that your two hands are defending, you'll be blocking the way. And I cannot clear an attack two hands against one. So I go thumb end, I go behind the ear. So my grip goes. Because for you to defend, you need to get there. And when you get there, you elevate your elbow, expose the armlock so it's hard.
Speaker B: So you put the thumb in, and then there's the dreaded, like the other person just waits for you to loop the arm over.
Speaker A: Yeah, but that's over.
Speaker B: It's. Once you get the thumb in, it's over. Okay.
Speaker A: No, but when I'm there, it's. If I get that because they're bridging, you know, they try. I'm not using their hand to post.
Speaker B: Now your head is.
Speaker A: My head is very close to the floor when I try to bridge. And, you know, my forehead would touch the floor. That would be used as a hand.
Speaker B: But it's not on the floor.
Speaker A: Not necessarily, because if it's on the floor, my body collapse over you.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: So there's no place for my hand for me to work on your neck. So I need some space between us.
Speaker B: So I don't completely can bob up and down.
Speaker A: Yeah. I try to keep a gap between us.
Speaker B: So that pursuit that takes many, many, many years. I don't know if you've seen Jiro dreams of sushi doing the simple thing. That's not so simple, but it kind of looks simple of the over and over and over and over and over, and presumably getting much better simple. It becomes very simple. But you're picking up details probably along the way. There's wisdom along the way. What is that? Is that there's, like, lessons that you just kind of accumulate over time. Like one training sessions, you'll see maybe, like, the positioning of the thumb, like this. Detailed positioning of the thumb or something like this. And then you like, okay, you, like, load that in.
Speaker A: They'll be very basic because there is not that many different ways. Maybe one, two. I just do one. Any other is not as strong because it's about getting a strong grip on your collar. I mean, the sun is. It's the thumb goes inside, you know, is it the thumb in or four fingers in? But it's getting a strong grip on the collar. As long as, you kNow, this is just holding and feeling strong.
Speaker B: So that's JUst two options. So it's the dynamic stuff along the way. And then some of that is timing, too.
Speaker A: It's timinG.
Speaker B: Are you also, like, making people, like, faking them out, making them think about something else?
Speaker A: No, not at that point there's not, because I cannot fake anything else at that point because I will have to change my positioning to, you kNow, maybe to fake an armlock, then I have to move out from that. So then I will lose that control I have.
Speaker B: So what's the process towards mastery? If you were to convert that to something that generalizes beyond Jiu jitsu, how can you get that good at a simple thing, practice and what that simple. The same exact thing over and over.
Speaker A: It's just a matter of how long would take you.
Speaker B: So all that's true. That's true.
Speaker A: I mean, like I said, that's true. Look how long it took me. People give up along the way.
Speaker B: There is intricacies to that journey towards perfection. There's a lot of people that do jiu jitsu for decades, and don't get better.
Speaker A: No, because they don't train the way they should. They don't train to get better. They train to get tough. There's a big difference. Most people, they train to get tough. So they are tough. You know, like we were talking before, they don't practice the weakness you want to be good at. You want to be really good at jujitsu. You have to practice your weakness, not your strength. You have to practice everything, but you have to be equally strong in every position. They all exactly the same, you know, your guard, top, bottom, side, control, top, bottom, turtle, half guard, mount back. I mean, you pick, take down, it's, and then you get into details of escaping triangle, applying the triangle, escaping armlock, different scenarios of, you know, it's, the one thing is defending the arm lock when, you know, you have your time, your arms very close to your body. The other thing is to defend the arms when your arm is almost getting and then when you got your arm. So there's so many things to practice that you need to repeat them over and over again until you're confident enough that when you get there, you have a chance.
Speaker B: And you can do the same kind of thing for even the final stages of a cross choke from mom.
Speaker A: Everything. I mean, of course, like, you don't practice escaping the armlock with a full arm straight. And because, you know, it's, that's gone. I mean, you, you practice, you know, you practice escaping the arm lock. When he takes your arm, you have, you know, you have a chance of trying to escape, but you don't practice, you know, okay, take my arm. When I say go, go. I mean, you got, you know, you pop the arm. That is like, you get injured doing that. Escaping the cross call or choke. It's, I mean, escape, not letting the person get there. Yeah, you can escape. You can practice escaping triangles because, you know, it's like, it's, you, you have a way better chance of escaping triangle then. Okay, mount to me. Put both hands in my neck. I mean, it's over, you know, don't be there.
Speaker B: What's the best submission in jiu jitsu?
Speaker A: A choke, I would say.
Speaker B: From which position? If I took a billion dollars to start in a position, like in a submission, and you only get the billion if you get the submission, which one would you start?
Speaker A: Cross collar choking them up.
Speaker B: Cross collar choking them. Not from the back.
Speaker A: No. You have a better chance keeping from the back.
Speaker B: Really?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Even with the hooks?
Speaker A: Even with everything.
Speaker B: Do you think some people disagree with you?
Speaker A: I don't care. I have a better escape. I have a better chance escaping from the back than if you mount me, put my hands on my neck.
Speaker B: So I've been that many were facing yourself. And I will give you a billion dollars to escape. You. You would, you would pick from the.
Speaker A: Back thousand times over. Like, really no comparison.
Speaker B: You have, like with hooks with like a triangle.
Speaker A: Doesn't matter. You can do whatever you want.
Speaker B: Like a body triangle. Okay. Okay.
Speaker A: Like really thousand times over.
Speaker B: What?
Speaker A: No question.
Speaker B: You. The mount is a super controlling position.
Speaker A: It's not just because cross collar choke in the mouth. The moment that you put both hands on my neck, you know, you have to. Your arms need to be very close to your body to attack. So that means there's very little space between us. So that means there's very little space for you to work on your escape. And the moment that you cannot bridge. Let's suppose I have. The person has a good mouth, so you cannot bridge them off. What else? You don't have space to try to work on your defense being in the back. I have all the space around me to work on my defense. In my arms, I have the mobility to bring them anywhere. So I. Because of that, it gives you me a much better chance. And you cannot. I can move my body if you my back. You cannot pin me. I cannot take you off my back. First, I need to defended the choke. But you have no control over my body. So that means there's still a lot of movement that I can try to use to escape in the mount. There's no movement. I'm pinned down. I cannot move. And I have no space between us to escape.
Speaker B: Well, the argument against that this is great is that on the bottom of mount, I do have my hands between. So you're saying they're pinned. There's nothing between where. I mean, you could get them in theory, you could. Somehow you could, but there's no.
Speaker A: You can, but then there's no space. They'll be squeezed between our bodies.
Speaker B: If it's an incredible. If it's an incredible mount.
Speaker A: No, it does not mount. Like how? Standing. If I put both hands on your neck. If I'm gonna go for the cross collar choke, after I get my hands in, the next step is to pull you close to me. So it's this. My arms needs to be close.
Speaker B: There's the hands that could do something.
Speaker A: They can come in, but they have very limited space between us.
Speaker B: Yes, yes. No, I mean to push your body away to only put standing.
Speaker A: Not if your back is against the floor? Sure.
Speaker B: Okay. The argument against the mount is, or the argument for back control as being the most dominant position is even though I have hands, I can't really use them effectively as a fact, knowing the.
Speaker A: Mount of, there's no space. There's no space. You can try. I mean, you can squeeze your hand in. I mean, there's still things that you could do, but they're so limited.
Speaker B: So if you polled the hundred best competitors of all time, what do you think they would answer to that? Do you think most would agree with you?
Speaker A: I don't care. It will show me the excuse, the ability to see.
Speaker B: Okay, so the perfect mount versus the perfect back control.
Speaker A: There's no question.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: There's no question for me. I mean, argue with me. Like, show me, because I'm not, I'm not being stubborn, because I'm being, I mean, scientific. So explain it to me why the back you would be harder, it would be better to be a position to finish than mount. If you can explain it to me, why I might change my mind.
Speaker B: I was trying to, but I don't have the cred. I'm like a middle school science student trying to talk to Einstein here. Okay. Besides you, who do you think is the greatest jiu jitsu competitor of all time? Can you make the case for some of them? Marcelo Bushesha, Leandro Lowe.
Speaker A: I'll have to go with Bushesa, because look at how many titles he has. I mean, he has by far more than Marcelo. Marcelo stopped quite early. Leandelo has eight, but Muchesha is better than him.
Speaker B: What do you think makes Bochesho so good?
Speaker A: He's a heavyweight that moves like a lightweight. He moves very fast, but he's very agile for his size.
Speaker B: So the agility combined with aggression.
Speaker A: Yeah. So it's very hard to control him because he moves fast, and he's 112 kilos, 115 sometimes, or 110. I mean, I'm not sure, but he's about, around that. So 240 in pounds. So when you, when you're agile, 240 pounds, that makes it very hard to control you.
Speaker B: What about making the case for some others? What about the little guys? What about Marcelo? If you were to make the case for him being the strongest, what makes Marcelo good?
Speaker A: Marcelo Garcia is extremely technical. I mean, I think he's one of my favorite jujitsu fighters, because in a technical way, I think he's probably one of the best.
Speaker B: His raw technique in a bunch of different positions for submissions, he's not very powerful.
Speaker A: You know, physically, he's not very strong, but he can make himself very strong, and his technique is very, very high level.
Speaker B: Have you ever trained with him?
Speaker A: No, I fought him twice. Yeah, but he's much smaller than me.
Speaker B: What happened in those matches?
Speaker A: The first fight, I topped him, I.
Speaker B: Think, five minutes in which submission.
Speaker A: Choke from the back. Collar, choke from the back. And the second time I beat him by points. But a very large, I think, twelve.
Speaker B: Two, actually, just to continue. I wonder if John Donahue would agree with you about mountain back. I can't wait to. This is a bear versus lion conversation, but I'm looking. There's statistics about. I'm not letting this go. Uh, there's statistics about. Oh, look at that. Hodger. What do you know? Looking at Hodger Gracie statistics for, um, most successful submissions. Choke from the back.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Is the most. So.
Speaker A: So people panic, scientists, because people panic when I'm out. They turn the back, I choke them out.
Speaker B: That's one explanation. But for people, it is interesting that, of course, this doesn't capture, but this captures a lot of your major matches. And we should say that you've submitted most of your opponents, so you rarely win on points. Usually when submissions, choke from back is most of them. Then cross choke from mount. Arm bar is a lot too. So 18 from choke from back. Twelve. Cross choke, ten. Armbar, five. RnC rear naked is for no Gi. Okay.
Speaker A: So tells them Ezekiel is very powerful. I took out using a strong weapon.
Speaker B: Yeah. Also from out.
Speaker A: Also from out.
Speaker B: Oh, that's when you can't get the one hand in.
Speaker A: No, because the Ezekiel most times I use against people is that is the attack, that as soon as I get to the mount, when they try to escape the open up and I get them, it has to be at that initial timing.
Speaker B: So it's not a thing you used to, like, bother them in order to.
Speaker A: Either, either I get it right, right away or I don't bother trying much. Because you need to keep one hand behind the head and that you naturally on that position as soon as you mount most of the times. And the moment that you mount someone, no one accept that they go mounted. They're gonna explode to get out. So holding the head, it gives you a better way to dominate them initially, you know, to deal with that explosiveness on the beginning, on the initial, on the beginning. And then. But then you have to let go to try it. You're very limited holding the head in terms of goats.
Speaker B: Shanji, I feel like he doesn't get enough credit that he deserves. He had an extremely dominant performance in competition. What about Salo and Shanji Hibero, what are your thoughts about what makes them so good? You had a bunch of tough matches with ashanji.
Speaker A: Yeah. And salah eight times.
Speaker B: Eight times you fought?
Speaker A: Yeah, for eight times. Shande? I fought salo once.
Speaker B: What? I think I'm bringing up a sore point. Oh, did Shanji tap when you, or did the time run out and that was the last time you guys faced each other?
Speaker A: Yeah. 2008.
Speaker B: That was incredible to watch. Also, I think you pulled guard with 1 minute left, working towards attacking. I mean, it's probably very tough to get anything, and for people who don't know, time ran out. You had something that looked like an arm block, and Shanji looked like he may be tapping, but it looked like he might be just celebrating, which is most likely.
Speaker A: I'm not sure. I. I'm not sure it was. I'm not sure because I think his arm just, just straight. His arm. Time finish.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: So I'm not sure if it was tapping to, you know, to let go. Time. Time's up. Or because of the outside. Most likely the time was up.
Speaker B: Yeah. And also, there's a thing where you start, you realize there's only three, 2 seconds left. He used to kind of start celebrating. You realize that Hadrian's not going to be able to finish the sambar in the time left, so you start celebrating.
Speaker A: No, I think he topped to say the time is up.
Speaker B: The time is up. Anyway, what do you think? The longevity, especially is impressive with Shanji. How long?
Speaker A: I think he doesn't get credit as much as he deserves because he pushed his career very far, and the last few years, he was on his best. So he's. If you would have stopped before, you know, you would, people would remember him on his highest, but he kind of pushed more than his peak, let's say.
Speaker B: How hard is it for you to walk away? We'll talk about journey into MMA as well. But you basically, especially with the second match against bushes, basically walked away on top, beating arguably the greatest competitor of all time and just walking away.
Speaker A: It wasn't that hard, to be honest, because that was something that I was considering for a while, because the last few years of my career, let's say he was fighting MMA at the same time was fighting Jiu Jitsu, and it was very challenging to do both. Like, I don't. There's not another person who ever did that because the training is a confliction with the way you train. Everybody who start doing MMA start focusing MMA, their jiu jitsu gets worse because they stopped training with the game, everybody, no exception.
Speaker B: Was your Jiu Jitsu also getting worse?
Speaker A: No, because I made sure I kept training with the guy and I kept fighting at least the world championship once a year. That was my goal. I'm like, I'm gonna go for MMA, but I love Jiu Jitsu and I still wanna fight the highest level. So I kept fighting once a year for a few years. It was a challenge, especially because the two or three times when I competed at the worlds, it was right after MMA fight. I had and no gear. You don't have the grips. So my grips, it made a big difference on my grip, so I was weaker grip wise, so I felt that. So I knew it was like, it's unnecessary risk, because I'm not. If I cannot be 100%, so what am I doing this? But I'm stubborn. I love jujutsu. That's like, I love fighting jujitsu. I never loved mma. I've liked it, but I think if all Greece, I wouldn't done it.
Speaker B: So the thing you felt the most is the grips?
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Could you win a guy world championship without gripping?
Speaker A: No.
Speaker B: Like just pretending it's no gee match. They get to grip you, but you don't?
Speaker A: No.
Speaker B: So grips are essential.
Speaker A: Of course. I mean, how can you choke someone like, it's. If your grips are weak, your forearms will fatigue and then you will have no power, and then you cannot do anything.
Speaker B: Yeah. You could still arm lock and you can. So I meant more not for the submission, but for the control of the game of it.
Speaker A: But you need to, need to grip to get there.
Speaker B: To get there.
Speaker A: And if you grip so weak, but.
Speaker B: You also have grips in nogi, can she use those grips?
Speaker A: No.
Speaker B: This is a thought experiment. So like, I'm trying to understand how essential.
Speaker A: Get a nogi, gotta go fight with the GiD. They panic.
Speaker B: They panic.
Speaker A: Of course.
Speaker B: Everyone panics. A bear panics when they're in the water with a shark. But that doesn't mean the bear can't still win. When it stops panicking and relaxes, it's not possible. That's another discussion. Can a bear beat a shark in the water? Actually, I need to maybe a polar bear because they're pretty good at swimming.
Speaker A: Okay, I say not possible for the no gear guy to win, but the.
Speaker B: Bears is a further discussion. What was to you, the biggest difference between mixed martial arts and jujitsu? What are some interesting differences, some interesting insights, even just about the grappling within both sports.
Speaker A: So the biggest difference for me between MMA and jujitsu is first, is the speed. Like jujitsu, you know, like a ten minutes match. I can take my time. There's no dangers that forces me to move fast. MMA, you have to be 100% sharp and fast from 1st second of the fight, because punches are coming. You can get knocked out anytime. One mistake, you're out. You still don't have that. I don't have to worry about quick submissions because it's all about the way my body is positioned, my grips. It's easy to avoid. It's easier to see it coming. It's like a quick submission, a surprise. It only works if you make a mistake, if you're not correct positioning. Otherwise, it's impossible. It's extremely difficult. MMA is nothing. I mean, one split second mistake. And when the person comes, you have to respond. You have to match his pace. I mean, you can slow down, but it's like you're forced to respond so much farther. It's a lot more physical, a lot more. And you need to be physical much better. Conditioning faster. It's explosiveness. It's much harder.
Speaker B: Is it possible in the MMA to.
Speaker A: Calm things down if they change the rules? Yeah, five minute rules. No.
Speaker B: Ah, I see. So, like, I just meant, actually, technically speaking, is there ways to. To take an opponent that's being exceptionally aggressive?
Speaker A: You can clinch, clinch, but then he takes it down. He keeps moving. Something is hard to control that pace. You can, you don't. If you play defense, you save more energy than if you try to be the aggressor and respond.
Speaker B: And even getting to the clinch is very difficult.
Speaker A: Yeah, they have no way to hold yourself there. So that was the biggest challenge for me in MMA, is the speed, because I'm a very slow start fighter. If you look at my matches, I start very slow, because if I go hard, you know, I fatigue faster. So for me, that was the hardest part of, is to start fast.
Speaker B: What about on the ground? Is there something different, more challenging in the ground?
Speaker A: Being in the bottom? Yes. This punches punch coming.
Speaker B: How fundamentally different is jujitsu with punches on the ground?
Speaker A: Ah, it changes everything. Everything which, which parts? The distance that you allow your opponent to be on you. The techniques that you choose to apply, you know, you have to. Your body has to be aware of the punches, and you are a lot more limited on your attacks.
Speaker B: So you're known for your closed guards. How does your closed guard have to adjust? How does the positioning of your hands have to adjust when you're on the bottom of close guard?
Speaker A: So in the guard, especially in the closed guard, you have to keep the person very close to you, or you have to kick him away. That's the guard is either I'm hugging you or get away from me.
Speaker B: And in Jiu jitsu, you're allowed to have a middle.
Speaker A: Yeah, Jiu jitsu, there's a lot you can allow the person to be.
Speaker B: What about getting armlock or triangle submissions from the guard? Is that fundamentally different? Because you don't have the middle game?
Speaker A: It's much harder. There's barely no open guard in MMA. Very little. Because the open guard, there's a distance between you and him.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: There's a distance you cannot control. It's much harder to control that punch coming, and I have to position myself a way to block that, and it limited my attacks, my options of attacks.
Speaker B: Is there a reason, correct me if I'm wrong, but I don't think you do open guard much in Jiu jitsu. In no Gi, is there a reason for that?
Speaker A: It's harder with the explosive, explosive person because it's not when they're moving fast, then you have to try to slow them down.
Speaker B: So you like guards that allow you to control the person. And close guard is the ultimate control.
Speaker A: It's not ultimate control, but close guard puts in a position that I'm attacking and you're defending. You cannot attack me from my close guard. We can argue that there might be one or two attacks, but it's, like, very, very, very limited and depends who you're fighting against.
Speaker B: I hate the close guard being on top. Well, against a good close guard is very.
Speaker A: No one likes. It's terrible.
Speaker B: It's horrible.
Speaker A: Yeah, it's one sided.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: So even the guard, and he's one sided. The person, the bottle has the advantage. I can be completely relaxed in my close guard, and I cannot be completely relaxed.
Speaker B: You know what the most annoying thing is? Is somebody who is both good and extremely confident with the close guard because they have that smug energy about them. They know how much unpleasant, how much work it takes to pass this anyway, especially people with longer legs. Is there something you wish he did differently in how you started training at MMA, in that trajectory, in figuring out how to train, how to get good? Like, what have you learned about getting good at MMA from having done it? If you were to start now, for.
Speaker A: Example, I think I'd have to dedicate it more.
Speaker B: I didn't dedicate enough both, like, literally time, number of training sessions, training, but.
Speaker A: Also mental training wise, physics, I think a lot more the physical part of.
Speaker B: It, the strikes, everything.
Speaker A: The strike from the beginning. It's because, I mean, I love jujutsu. Like, it's. I truly love all the aspects of it. Fighting, training, you know, the practice, the competition. I don't have that for MMA. So it's hard to give your heart to it, something that you don't have the passion to it, like jujitsu, you know, I gave my heart to it. Like, I did everything that I had to MMA. I never. I didn't do that. So that's why it was. I won't say it was wrong for me to have to do it because I don't regret doing. I always, you know, looking back as a kid, when I decided to, you know, to be. To take jujitsu for life, I already knew that at some point I would have to do MMa. There's almost like, that's the path of a gracie. You know, you. When you ready, you go do Mma.
Speaker B: So there was a, like a duty versus a love.
Speaker A: Yeah. That was not a choice. That was like, I have to. It's just the life I took. He would lead that way.
Speaker B: Are you proud of that step? You know, go against the natural love and towards more duty, I think.
Speaker A: I don't regret it because if I hadn't done it, I would feel there was something missing. So I don't regret doing. I would regret not doing.
Speaker B: The tricky thing is the choice to go to MMA could have compromised your ability to win against bushes, and it didn't. And it's. It's a fascinating case study. It still doesn't make sense to me. After all those years, you're able to come back and go against the best person in the world and beat him.
Speaker A: Yeah. And I had to, because the first fight we had, I had something stuck in my throat for a long time.
Speaker B: So you think about that.
Speaker A: Oh, yeah. I'm like, as soon as that first fight finished, I had said that got stuck in my throat, that I already. At that point, I knew I'm gonna have to fight him again. I knew. I always knew there's no choice. I have to.
Speaker B: Oh, man. All right, well, in terms of no gee, who do you think is the best no gee competitor of all time?
Speaker A: There's no question, you know, Gordon is. I mean, it's. I don't think he's right to say the best compared to of all time. Cause he's still very young. I think that's something that he can be aggro in the end of when.
Speaker B: The person you don't want him to get lazy. You know what I'm saying?
Speaker A: No, no. I mean, but you cannot praise someone in the middle of his career, you know, so it's. You cannot call him the best ever. He's 26 or 27. So it's. I mean, he's great. He's very good. He's ahead of all of other competitors, I think. And, I mean, he's having an amazing career. You know, he's doing amazingly well. So, I mean, when he finished, when he finally retired, then you can argue.
Speaker B: Like, you know what? There's wisdom in that. It matters how you finish, right?
Speaker A: Of course.
Speaker B: It's very interesting.
Speaker A: I think the Nogi is relative new. That nogi scene, there was not. There wasn't a scene before. I think he started now on his generation, you know, his time. Because before, like, when I was competing, no, gee, was just ADCC. There's nothing else. Every two years. Emer first was only in the Emirates. You know, you had to go there to compete. So there was not even a scene. There was like this one tournament that gives a lot of money to, you know, all to competitors, to fighters, and brings fighters from other modalities. You know, Mocha Van Narsdale, you know, some wrestlers, Greco Roman, you know, they can compete against each other and they, you know, they create that set of rules, try not to favor anyone. So that was it. So you cannot be called the greatest doggie of all time if you only have one tournament every two years. Only in Emirates, they have to be invited to. But I think now it grew a lot. Now we have so many different tournaments. Now we have a scene. You have people that only train Nogi. They're fully dedicated to Nogi. Then you have supervised different tournaments. So now it's professionally you can do just no gi now, which before was unheard of it, because you have one or two tournaments, if you cannot be called a no gee fighter, fighting once or twice. Once every two years. Twice every two years.
Speaker B: Yeah. Now there's entire systems that are optimized for Nogi that could be fundamentally different. Like, what do you think about the body lock? Like this passing with the body lock? I don't know if you get an understanding of it that I think it's okay. It's a popular way to. What is it maybe to apply to stay tight.
Speaker A: To stay tight, very close to your opponent. So he can't push, create distance. He can push away, but somehow it.
Speaker B: Shuts down the hips as well.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Makes it more difficult to.
Speaker A: Yeah, kind of trap your legs, your back gets stuck on against the floor.
Speaker B: Are you like, scientifically curious about these new developments? Do you think? Do you, do you have answers in your head to them?
Speaker A: Most.
Speaker B: So body lock is one interesting one, obviously, foot locks is another. And I don't mean just the foot locks, but the whole like, control aspect of foot locks. That's interesting. And there's other, there's other interesting stuff. John is really into the wrestling aspect, but not wrestling wrestling, but wrestling everywhere. Jiu jitsu at all levels of the plane. That's very interesting because, you know, obviously Jiu jitsu has not really been, you know, unlike like freestyle wrestling and so on, has not been like a systematic, scientific, rigorous exploration of wrestling. It's like you're on your feet and you're on the ground, not. There's a lot of interest.
Speaker A: John is academic. He tried to, you know, numbers, mathematics, everything.
Speaker B: Well, you kind of are too.
Speaker A: Yeah, no, I mean, not I am, because you have to understand what you're doing. You know, there's a. Everything, there's a step by step, like logistics, like details. Every single move, there's a reason for it. You know, there's things around that happens. It's. The more you know, the better you are, right. The more knowledgeable compared or whatever. So I think with the footlocks, with the nogi, like if you look back, you know, if you think of used to be seen as a really bad thing to attack the foot, it wasn't seen as a good option of attack, mainly.
Speaker B: What is it like? Respectable gentlemen don't attack the legs or what?
Speaker A: No, because if you look back, you know, the tournaments when they were created, all the rules and everything else was to simulate a real fight with no punches. When I was having a gi, I mean, if you ask what is Jiu jitsu like? What are you trying? What's the main goal of jiu jitsu? To dominate your opponent. What's the main goal of fighting is we're fighting. It's of course, submission is the ultimate goal, but the, you know, before that, the main goal is to dominate you. Like, we're fighting, I have to dominate you. And then the submission comes and foot locks. It's. I don't require any domination on you. I don't. I don't need to be in a dominant position to attack your foot. And if I attack your foot, you're still free to knock me out. If your body goes down to my foot, I can still come close to you or stand up and I'll punch you. So it's not a good position to be in a real fight to attack in the foot. I mean, how many times you've seen that going bad, that went bad in MMA fight? I mean, of course you had some sort of success with the hill hooker. It's no questions, but how many times went wrong. People go knocked out, attack in the foot. So you can't say it's the best position to be, it's okay to go, but it's a very high, risky position to go. So that's why it's not in a real situation, it's not seen as a good thing. So when you translate that to jujitsu, when attacking the foot is not seen as a good thing because when you reflect that to a real situation, it's not going to go down well. So he was always seen as an easy way out, you know, easy cut. You try, you're trying to do easy path. You can't pass my guard, you can't dominate me, then you're trying to attack my foot. That's why it was always seen as a, you know, not as the best, a great submission of which win.
Speaker B: But the sad side effect of that is it was completely underdeveloped because of that.
Speaker A: Exactly. Of course. So people never really developed that. But now the tournaments, the fighting, he got completely, not completely, but he got some, is no longer seen as, you know, as a simulation of the real thing. Now is a sport. It's only seen as a sport. So now it doesn't matter if you attack my foot, you cannot punch me. So why is it bad now to attack the foot? It's not seen as a bad thing anymore. And now it got really developed.
Speaker B: I don't know. That's another bear versus shark question. But, you know, there is, in a street self defense situation, it's possible to imagine where footlocks would be effective for highly. But I guess if you invest 10,000 hours, it's better to invest it in chokes.
Speaker A: Yeah. To dominate. If I'm, you know, if we're fighting, it's way better for me to be on your side control on the mount where I can pin you, be completely safe than to stay inside your legs trying to attack your foot. What?
Speaker B: People would argue that there's a lot of very dominant controlling positions in the whole footlock game, right?
Speaker A: It is. But you can go bad very quickly.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: No, I mean, there's some great ways to control someone that he cannot escape, but it can go bad very quickly. That's the thing.
Speaker B: Well, even back control can go bad very quickly on the street. So mount, I don't know, is mount a really good position?
Speaker A: But then there's no good position. Then there's no good position.
Speaker B: There's no.
Speaker A: Every position there's a risk. Okay. Attacking the foot is a way higher risk than side control. Mount back. That's what I'm saying. The back is not the best way to pin someone unless you underneath me, because if you try to rotate, I can sacrifice the back and just allow you being the mount.
Speaker B: Okay. There you go. Would you prefer mount or back mount or they're flattened like steel mount. Thought I'd get you. So, yeah, going back to Gordon, what do you think makes that guy so good? We were just a ADCC, got to see him.
Speaker A: Historically dominant first performance, his dedication, the way he trains and how much he trains. And of course you have to add his mind, his belief to really try to be good, the best. So, you know, I don't know what his goals are, but I know he tried to be better than his opponent. So his belief are very strong, his dedication. He probably trains more than everybody else. I mean, I haven't seen firsthanded, but from what I hear, interviews with him and everybody else training, you know, the way everybody trains.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: You know, trying to. For my little knowledge I have, I'll bet he trains more than everybody else. And most important, how he trains and when I. I kind of already knew, but when I heard John podcast with you the other day, John was explaining the preparation, the training for the ADCC, and that kind of gave me a very strong idea how they've been training all these years. So, you know, when we said it's, you have to work on your weakness, so you have no weakness. He trains a lot on his weakness, which not everyone does that, you know, if you look other, I'm not going to name, but, you know, other main schools when like very strong competitors, great competitors, super tough people, but super tough, not great because they train, they spar very hard. That makes them tough. If you want to be good, you have to work on your weakness because when you spar, like we're saying, how many times you're going to practice escaping a bad position, like a submission hold or a pinning position, side control mount, or is very little the amount time you get to spend on those positions if you don't start there. So he's very smart the way he trains.
Speaker B: And part of that is also cerebral. It's not just putting yourself in those positions, but talking through different ideas like they talk, they experiment. It's very. At first glance, it's philosophical almost, is you're trying to create systems, constantly trying to understand how this fits into this big picture.
Speaker A: And. And then it goes back to, what is jiu jitsu? What is fighting? He's fighting for dominance. You know, he's fighting for the ultimate dominance positions, which is back and mount. There's no others. And from that, you finish. So if you look back at his, you know, over the years, you know of his past fights. Before, he used to mainly focus in legs. And over the past few years now, he's mainly focusing in finishing from the mountain back. Well, that's when he became really good.
Speaker B: So part of that is Mister John Donahar, what do you think? You've known John for a long time. What makes that guy interesting, special, and good? What have you learned about Jiu jitsu in life from John Donaharthe?
Speaker A: He's super smart, I mean, eccentric. And he lives through Jiu jitsu. He's 24/7 thinking better ways to teach how to make his competitors better. And that as a coach, when you have that dedication as a coach, that it makes the most difference of your athletes. Like, which other big team you have that coach with that motivation. All the other schools is either someone that competes that push the training, like Andre Gavin. It's no, he's one of the competitors. So he brings the hype in everyone else, but he doesn't have the time. He doesn't spend the time working individually. I mean, I'm sure he does, but it's limited because he's also a competitor. And, you know, looking. Most of the other big schools, like, you don't have that nowadays. All the leaders, the main coaches for the other big schools, they have other things, other things in their lives. They don't fully dedicate it to the athletes. Joan does. You know, look at the interview. He spends hours and hours a day studying how can await the system to make his athletes better. Look at the results.
Speaker B: I enjoy just sitting back and forth. You can actually just get him. You control him essentially, by sending interesting videos. And you could just see his mind. He's gonna do research on that. Cause I kept sending him videos of bears. Cause he claimed that a lion would beat a bear. Because I'd love to get your take on this. Okay, so the bear is much bigger, much stronger. But his take is that the bears don't have experience of fighting to the death. That's not part of the culture. They're more scared. In fact, he keeps sending me footage of, like, even like, a small mountain lion scaring a bear away because they don't want to fight. So his idea is that it really matters, your life experience, how much you fight. It's not necessarily the skill, like the dimensions, the characteristics you have. But then I sent him. I'll show you. People should google this. It's bears fighting of any kind. And it's pretty much the most epic thing ever. Here, I'll show you. Like, look at these guys. The cardio, though, is interesting.
Speaker A: You know, it's funny I was going to mention that because I was, you know, flipping to Internet, I came. I came around that video.
Speaker B: Look how big these guys are.
Speaker A: No, they huge. But you see, they don't bite each other.
Speaker B: You think it's just playing.
Speaker A: They try intimidating because they don't want to get hurt, so they try to size each other up. You see, the whole fighting is sizing each other up. There's a lot of pushing, and the fur is so thick, so the claws doesn't really damage much.
Speaker B: And they're using a tree. So maybe they.
Speaker A: Yeah, I mean, there is bites, but see, there's very little. So the whole time they trying to intimidate the other one, like, winning the fight by their size.
Speaker B: And mostly about, like, the way drunk college kids fight, which is like some kind of display of dominance versus actual.
Speaker A: Yeah, they're not fighting to kill and bear or tiger, you know, they fight to finish unless the other one runs away. Like, one would die.
Speaker B: Yeah, lions and tigers. Yeah, but look at the cardio. Look how bad her cardio is. I wonder how my favorite part is when one of them just, like, stands behind a tree and says, all right, he's holding.
Speaker A: Let me catch my breath.
Speaker B: He sits down. He's like, all right. You can't.
Speaker A: It's over.
Speaker B: It's like. It's the equivalent in the forest. Tapping out. All right, all right. You got me.
Speaker A: Let me just catch you.
Speaker B: Look, they're both, like, just shot. But see, the thing that I was trying to make an argument for is that we get this rare footage. It's not rare. I mean, there's, like, hundreds of videos, but it's not millions of videos because there's a huge number of bears. And I was trying to say that there's some badass bear we don't know about because he just goes in there and just does work, and we just don't know about it because he's like everyone. See, the thing is, if you kill a lot of other animals, you probably have a territory that nobody's gonna mess with you. So it's very hard to catch the, uh, the, like the hodge gracie of bears. You know, he's just gonna be sitting there doing nothing. So. I don't know. I don't know. I feel like, of course, when you corner him, John will say that if you put a bear and a lion in a cage, the bear will win. If it's like, if it's. If they're forced to be to the death. But I don't know. Oh, let me ask you another ridiculous thing before I ask serious questions. So Joe Rogan thinks that a tie is an effective way to attack somebody. I don't know if. I can't believe I haven't in the time in Vegas, I didn't talk to you about this. I think it's not. Have you ever explored this as the best choker in the world? Have you ever explored the use. Because, like, jiu jitsu has the jacket, but the tie, to me, is a pretty shitty way to choke somebody. Like, intuitively, it thinks, like, it's a good way, but it can slide around. It feels like. It feels like there's no way to really pin.
Speaker A: You would need to. Right.
Speaker B: So you use it the way you use a belt? Essentially, yeah. But then I would guess so, yeah. I don't think it's. And I think if it gives you a. It actually has the reverse effect, which it gives you the false sense of confidence that you can use it, and instead it'll just distract you.
Speaker A: So he think is a stronger weight than the collar or just a strong way.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Stronger than the collar.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: I don't see how. Maybe just I.
Speaker B: In a street fight scenario. Right.
Speaker A: Like, by the time you grab the tie, the guy goes punch your nose. Yeah.
Speaker B: What George St. Pierre thinks is the best use of the ties to actually, like, what do you call that? So basically, to all balance them, which is an interesting point to, like, use, too.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: But you can use the jacket for the same kind of thing.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: I don't know. I haven't really fully tested it.
Speaker A: It's, I'll say jacket or tie for that perspective of unbalancing, off balancing the person. It can be, yeah. Because you, you know, you have control of the person's neck, the collar, you know, the jacket moves. So for the purpose of off balancing the person, I would agree with George.
Speaker B: See, the thing is, that's the thing about martial arts is you can say all kinds of bullshit, but until you really test it in over a period of years through competition, you won't really know. I think, like, that's where my gut says just how easily the time moves. My gut says the collar, there is something really powerful about the jacket. There's, like, the way it sits. I mean, the fact that the arms trap it from rotating. It's a weird piece of clothing. It's a really dangerous piece of clothing that we put on ourselves.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Like, and it's kind of cool that we've developed this whole martial arts system that allows you to use that to do a lot of damage. It's very interesting.
Speaker A: So when we're saying something that you develop over the years of practice, over and over again, going back to the fishiness of the amount of back by experience of attacking people, people always had a much higher chance of escaping from the back than from my mount. So it's, I feel if I mount and you get both my hands on your neck, you cannot escape. If my hands are deep, it's over like that. I don't remember anyone escaping, but I do remember if my hands are deep on your collar or even real naked. Choke is still a hassle. Like, clean.
Speaker B: You have some data on this. Is there some aspect to you, to how your body is, the characteristics of your body that that fits a particular set of techniques? So if we just look at jiu jitsu broadly, do you see most techniques being able to work for most people? Like, what you're saying about mount versus back control. Is this. Is it possible for a different body type? The mount is not as effective.
Speaker A: Yeah, of course. I'll say very big people. They should amount.
Speaker B: You don't think of yourself as big?
Speaker A: No, big. I mean fat. Oh, they should stay off the amount.
Speaker B: Why is that? That's a counter.
Speaker A: It's mobility. It's like, it's. I think, you know, you don't see any, you know, like, there was few weights, like 160 kilos, like, you know, in pounds, I don't know, 270 pounds of a lot of fat. It's. You need a bit of mobility, and that wouldn't. It would play against you. Even back is the same.
Speaker B: Requires mobility.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: Okay. So even though it doesn't look like you're moving very much, when you're doing mo, that requires mobility. Cause you have to reposition and weight.
Speaker A: Redistributionally, adjusting your body.
Speaker B: All right. The legend goes, you got very good by training, mostly with lower ranks. What was your training like in that environment?
Speaker A: So when I first moved to London, I was 20 years old. I opened my school there, and I had nobody to train with. I had one guy that was teaching with me at black belt, middleweight. He was good. And that's it. Brawler was. He moved to the same. He moved to England the same time as I did, but he was in Birmingham. So we did got together, you know, maybe twice a week closer, you know, when we were preparing for something, if not, then not very often, as often as we could. But did I say not that often? And I had just colorbell students. There was no one high level. There was no one world champion in any belt. To train. Then you need to create a scenario that simulates, that can simulate, you know, like a realistic fighting. So I think on that aspect, you know, when people said, you know, people ask, why do I have such a basic game? I think that also influenced me sharpen up all my skills when I moved there because, you know, when I'm. If you practice with people, you know, lower level than you, you cannot. There's nothing to learn from them, or, you know, you can learn things and practice with them, but I would say very complex things on them. It is not the best. So it's I sharpen up all my skills. So, you know that when I really improved everything that I already knew to a higher level.
Speaker B: But how can you sharpen something if the resistance is much lower level than a purple belt?
Speaker A: Makes it very hard for you to skip side control. Doesn't have to be a war chamber black belt. It's, you know, if it's one is holding you, it can be very hard.
Speaker B: What about on the attack? How do you become literally, by far the best person at the cross choke from mount by training with purple belts.
Speaker A: It's sometimes purple belts defense way better than black belts.
Speaker B: Okay, see, a lot of people listening to that would be like, that makes no sense. Hodg Raci, how does that make any sense?
Speaker A: Because like a lot of the black belts, even world champions, they get to the black belt. They're really good in what they do, let's say, in the guard, you know, on top or in the bottom position. But their defense are not like very, very few people. High level have a very good defense because they don't practice. Then that goes back to how you train. You know, you can be very tough. Very tough will make you terrible defense because you're not going to practice your weakness. So your weakness still gonna be terrible. You can have the best guard in the world. Impossible to pass the day people pass your guard, you nothing like it's your guard is high, the highest level, but your side control defense or not your mount defense or not, so some purple bells, they practice the mount way more than that black belt did. So naturally, the difference is better.
Speaker B: So they get to experience the defensive position much, much, much more. And especially training with, you get really good at defending, and then over and.
Speaker A: Over again, you attack them with the same thing over and over again. They know what's coming. They will block, they will develop a defense over that.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Way better than most other high level black belts.
Speaker B: So both put yourself into really bad positions with low ranks and just keep attacking the same way over and over and over. Yeah. And with that, you're able to be at the, at top of the world at the world championships.
Speaker A: Yeah.
Speaker B: I mean, can you give some, what was the preparation like to a world championship with the lower ranks? I mean, I did a lot of.
Speaker A: Boxing, a lot of conditioning.
Speaker B: No, but conditioning is a big part of it.
Speaker A: But the one thing that helped me extremely living in England, in London, was training judo at the Budokoy in London. That helped me massively because it gave me the motivation to learn something new, because by then at the budoku, I didn't know the stand up was. I'm sure today it is, too, but by then it was even higher than it is today. There were some very high level judo guys training there, and the first time I went there, my stand up was terrible compared to theirs. I mean, it was bad, but compared to them was terrible. So I was getting through like a child, and that motivated me to keep coming back and get better. So that made my jujitsu much stronger. I became, my base got better. My top game improved. My pressure game improved.
Speaker B: Did Neil Adams train Ray Stevens when he.
Speaker A: I've never met Neil Adams.
Speaker B: Have you met Neil Adams? He's the voice of judo. I don't know if you watch the tournaments, he's incredible.
Speaker A: Yeah. Ray Stevens is silver medalist in the Olympics. He won european me. He won a lot.
Speaker B: So you did some judo training. What's your favorite throw? Like Asoto Uchimata.
Speaker A: I would say uchimata if I would pick one.
Speaker B: So that made you better at jiu jitsu as well?
Speaker A: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: And back then, like, for the first, I'll say maybe three years, maybe four, I went to Brazil for, like, two months before every major tournament got it. So I say, you know, I moved away from the school and I really focused. So I was really well prepared with my jewelry and everything else, sharpen up my skills, and then went to Brazil to train with, like, really high level people. So that way I would manage it to compete in the highest level.
Speaker B: What advice would you give to? Let's start with a complete beginner. So, you know, a bunch of people come up to me, they still want to start doing jiu jitsu. What advice would you give them?
Speaker A: Try to absorb as much technique as you can and try to be as relaxed as you can. Don't, you know, don't desperately try to fight so hard. Like, learn and move slow.
Speaker B: Move slow and relax.
Speaker A: That's the hardest thing to do. The hardest.
Speaker B: You know what I find with people? It seems like it's hard to even know that you're not relaxed. It's like the introspection. They don't even know what it feels like to relax.
Speaker A: Not even know. They tense.
Speaker B: Yeah, right.
Speaker A: They try to relax. They look at you, say, what? What do you mean, relax? I'm relaxed.
Speaker B: Exactly. Exactly.
Speaker A: The arms are shaking.
Speaker B: You feel it. And in terms of going slow, they're like, yeah, well, I'm going slow. No, you're. You're not. Yeah, there's. There's a. There's a grace and elegance of movement that you can probably pick up from a lot of other disciplines. Like, for me, I think that came from just learning piano. Piano at a young age. This for, I think, any mobility thing. To learn how to move efficiently, you have to know how to relax. It's just the fact that you can, like, the body can be tense, or it could be relaxed just knowing that fact.
Speaker A: Now imagine you. Shoulders tense. You think you play piano well, no, everything has to be relaxed.
Speaker B: I guess some of that is mind, too, but just knowing that and being self aware. But see, like, even me, you know, approaching a thing I'm not. I don't know anything about being a beginner. You're going to tense up no matter. And, like, it actually takes a conscious effort to think, to relax. I mean, that's massively.
Speaker A: That's why learning things as an adult is much harder than as a child. Like, it's very hard. And as an adult, it's like, to get to the highest level. It's not possible because you will never relax the way you should.
Speaker B: Yeah. Relax in the way that you become like water, but then you solidify in the right places. Yeah. Yeah. Is there advice you can give to an adult? So, like, somebody that has a job, like a hobbyist, like, how to progress, how to get.
Speaker A: I mean, train this. Just need to train as much as you can. Not, you know, five, seven days a week because you get. Gonna get injured. I mean, two or three times a week to start is the best way to, you know, to initiate your jujitsu journey and practice the same thing over and over again when they don't work, it's just because you're not doing well, not because, you know, you have to learn something else.
Speaker B: Do you see some value in just picking a set of techniques that seem, seem to draw your heart in? Like, for example. I'll give you an example. You're gonna yell at me?
Speaker A: But.
Speaker B: I never learned close guard. Well, it just never connected with me. You could say it's body mechanics, whatever. It doesn't matter. The point is, it's just like my heart never connected with it. You know, the way I justified it to myself is I felt like when you're bad, you're using the close guard, just like you could use the half guard to stall. So I was really drawn to the butterfly guard as a beginner because I thought I have, or open guard in general. I have no options to stall. So I'm going to learn. My thinking was, let me do the guard that enforces me to learn. And then I fell in love with the butterfly guard and open guard and so on. And I never, I never really understood the close guard. And the other thinking was, do I really need to understand the closed guard? Because it's always by choice that I go there so I can avoid. Not.
Speaker A: You can avoid anything you want. I mean, you don't have to do.
Speaker B: Anything in this life. Yes.
Speaker A: It doesn't make you complete. That means you have, you want to.
Speaker B: Be complete as a. This is the question. How valuable is it to be complete? To get good?
Speaker A: Depends how good you want to be.
Speaker B: Okay, let's go. Well, there's several questions there. Yeah. Okay. Like, to be the best in the world, do you need to be complete?
Speaker A: Of course. The best in the world. Of course you have to be complete. Otherwise, you. Somebody's gonna be better than you.
Speaker B: But what about, like. So, to understand, to defend, you have to be also good at the offense and in every single position.
Speaker A: Otherwise, you, you have a weakness, and someone can capitalize in that weakness.
Speaker B: Okay, what about to be, like, a hobbyist?
Speaker A: Then you don't have to, but can.
Speaker B: You, or is it still bad?
Speaker A: I mean, it's not bad. I'm. Nothing is bad. I mean, if, as a hobbyist, you start late, I mean, it's, it doesn't matter how far you're gonna get, as long as you enjoy it. Just train as much as you can. If it's twice a week, twice a week it is. You, you'll be limited how good you will be training twice a week, of course. Then the guy that trains twice a day, you know, it's just the more you train, the better you get.
Speaker B: But you have to select what you train. That's what I'm asking.
Speaker A: So, no, no. Yes, but, like, for how long? Like, there was some point in your life that you might try something, see if you like it. You know, there's some point on your life that you might. Okay, let me try close guard. You might not like it now. Maybe in two, three years from now.
Speaker B: Still don't like it. I kept trying it. Listen. Cause, listen. It's very difficult to get any respect in jiu jitsu. It's hard to get to black belt and beyond in jiu jitsu at a respectable place and not have a good close guard. Close guard is.
Speaker A: I mean, don't do it. It's not necessary.
Speaker B: I'm being a rebel.
Speaker A: No, no, it's not. It's. I'll say, because it's nothing. It's not a position that you under pressure that if you don't know, you'll be in trouble. You're not going to be in trouble not to know the close guard. You're just going to go straight for open guard. I mean, there's not a problem.
Speaker B: The main limitation is if you don't do close guard a lot that you don't quite, you don't get a full, complete picture of understanding how to attack close guard when somebody puts you into a close guard when you're on top. So it's nice to know both sides, if it's just to understand.
Speaker A: Yeah, but you can have a pretty good understanding of how to defend from the top and not having any bottom.
Speaker B: I mean, some of it is also just like the length of legs and just the geometry of your body. I'm sure MaRcelo GARcia has a good.
Speaker A: Close guard, but I've never seen. That's the point I'm trying to make.
Speaker B: In theory. In theory, you can imagine it, but for a hobbyist, I think it's interesting to think of that. Like, is it possible to. Is it possible to focus on a small set of techniques that help you to develop, of course. Still into a good, juicy and still enjoy and still be most people hobbies.
Speaker A: In the jujitsu world? 99%. I mean, people there competes, even the.
Speaker B: People that compete, 1%.
Speaker A: Max and I. You have high level competitors, have no clue what Coast Guard is.
Speaker B: Okay, thank you for making. No, I think you would say that most people don't have Coast Guard is such a, such a difficult position to understand for me.
Speaker A: Maybe one day we'll brainwash.
Speaker B: Yeah, good. I felt it's too easy to stall versus attack. That was my main concern is like, I want to be forced in every way to, to always be attacking, to always be moving, to always be. And it felt like if I got really good, I've seen it happen with half guard too. It's like when people get really good at half guard, it just feels stally. If you just look at the matches and so on, you slow things down to a thing that's not. You don't get reps on learning, you don't get action in interesting ways. So that was my worry, that I'll get old and fat and just sitting in close guard all day, holding on to the white belts, trying to kill me. Because it's also, I mean, that's the other thing for hobbyists and for everyone is to like, when you first start, I think you have to relax in the face of the fact that you're just getting your ass kicked non stop. Yeah, that can also be really tough on the ego. I think probably the right way to see that is you're growing as a person.
Speaker A: You see that clearly when they are like in a bad position. Let's say side mount or mount like a beginner, he will never relax on those positions. The moment that you say go, they like trying to push you out and explode. There's no relaxation and work on the defense. It's like, no, it's out and go until I have zero to give, until I'm exhausted. My arms cannot move.
Speaker B: It's kind of fun to watch, actually. What's the role of drilling? Do you like drilling?
Speaker A: I do not like drilling, but I'll tell you why I think fighting is mechanic. Right? So it's very important to drill a move until you learn the mechanic. Of course it's important. If someone want to teach you an armlock, you want to practice that movement until you learn the mechanic of it. But the guy's not resisting, so it's easy to apply it, right? So you apply as many times as you have to, until you know the mechanic of the moves, until you can apply the mechanics. The moment that you know how to apply, there's no more point in drilling. Now you have to practice. Now we have to practice with resistance. Of course you're not going to practice with the guy fully resisting. The guy is better than you because he's not going to give you a chance to practice that move. But you have to practice with resistance. So where does drilling comes on? That is, most of people, you know, they flow drill and everything. I think whatever you do, you condition in your body to do something is the, you know, you do, you repeat the same move over and over again as your body's conditioning to apply that movement or the technique. Drilling is not realistic because the other person is not resisting, you know, the flow movement or whatever. After you go beyond when you already know the mechanics. The drilling with no resistance is not going to teach you anything because you will never know if how to apply the movement with resistance. So it's pointless to carry on drilling after you learn the mechanics.
Speaker B: See, but youre a making it sound easy to learn the mechanics.
Speaker A: I would argue you can drill as many time. I'm not limiting how much you drill. Yes, you drill as much as long as you had to. I mean, it doesn't matter how long.
Speaker B: The benefit of drilling. I'm just playing devil's advocate with you. The benefit of drilling is that you can more efficiently get a higher number of reps in.
Speaker A: So what are you gonna gain with those reps?
Speaker B: Understanding the mechanics of the movement. And what I would like to argue is you don't necessarily need a resistance to deeply understand the mechanics of something. Now, I don't know. There's something for some, there's some moves like, I bet you you could drill your way to an incredible mount. Like Mount is a good example of that. You don't really need a resistance. I can imagine a world in which the resisting opponent is not essential for developing some of the very fine details of the mechanics.
Speaker A: Which one? Because I don't know any. What you say mount?
Speaker B: Yes.
Speaker A: What you're gonna achieve by drilling with no resistance after you learn the mechanics.
Speaker B: But see, what I'm trying to tell you, the learning the mechanics isn't a thing where you get a certificate and you're done. You're gonna learn the fine details of the way you redistribute your weight. You're going to learn how to move your. I don't understand.
Speaker A: A dead body.
Speaker B: What?
Speaker A: Yeah, like, everything you do is a slow process. And timing. Do you have timing? You can't have to understand moving, okay? It's the guy's resistance. Like, it's not. I'm not going to grab you and apply the movement. I need to grab you and feel when is the right time to do like that. That only comes when you with movement. If you're not fully resistant, how would I know?
Speaker B: You couldn't infer through it.
Speaker A: It's like with no movement, with no resistance.
Speaker B: Like there's some resistance.
Speaker A: Let's see. I'm lock.
Speaker B: Okay.
Speaker A: Okay. Let's say you've been drilling for a week.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: 5 hours a day. You should be an expert with the mechanics. But now how are you gonna carry on with drilling with no resistance? No, you have after that week drilling five times 5 hours a day, the arm lock. You still have no clue how to apply the arm lock against a resisting opponent. No clue. Zero. So you don't know the movement. You know the mechanic, which is, you know, it's like how long you have to drill and how. That doesn't matter. It varies of the person you can do for a month. After that month is overdevelop. You should understand how the mechanic works. You still have no clue how to apply the movement against a resisting opponent. You will never ever know how until you apply with a fully resistant opponent. That's the only way to know, to really learn a movement.
Speaker B: Yes, well put. But the question is, can you have a small percentage of time when you go against the resisting opponent to get the wisdom and the insight of what it takes to perform that movement? And you spend a large percentage of other time just practicing the mechanics of it. So like, do you need to, as you get better and better at technique, to basically drift away completely from drilling and more into the sparring? I'd like to. I just.
Speaker A: You like drilling?
Speaker B: No, I don't like drilling. I see, I. Well, yes, I like drilling, I would say, but I just see. It always bothered me in the jiu jitsu community how few people really saw the value of drilling. I seen in wrestling, especially in the, in the russian style of wrestling, like the value of drilling. I don't necessarily mean that it's like a dead body or like a dummy or something like that, but just getting the reps in, really focusing on the high amount of reps.
Speaker A: I agreed. In wrestling and judo, I agreed that drilling is very important. Initial drill, a thousand times each move.
Speaker B: Yeah. Judo is a really big one for.
Speaker A: It is because it's the movement. The timing, you know, is the precision of the movement. It has to be perfectly because it's one movement. Then you learn about the timing of the movement when you're fighting, but during fighting, you only need to know the time because your body movement is exactly the same when you drill.
Speaker B: That's really well put. Yeah. The mechanics is much more important there.
Speaker A: Yeah. But it's completely different for jujitsu because let's say from jujitsu like the armlock, for example. We use that as an example, let's say, from the close guard, even my close guard, before I go for the arm lock, I need to have set of grips. Let's say I have your collar in your arm, right? And then, you know, when you're drilling, I'm gonna grab your arm, I'm gonna grab your collar, and I'm gonna drill my body until I can apply the arm lock and finish. And I can do that a thousand times. Okay, now we're fighting. We start with the grip. The moment that I initiate the armlock attack, he will defend. The arm lock will not work. So it's not the one movement that will get me to attack the arm. There's a, there's a combination of other things that I need to do. I need to feel about your weight. You know, I need to get you close to me. There's so many other things involved that I need to feel. That only comes with life. Life with a fully resistant opponent.
Speaker B: Yeah. So pretty quickly, it has to be live.
Speaker A: Yeah. And then it comes how you practice, how you train, starting on that position and just saying, let's go. And the moment that we disengage from that position, we go back. That's when you really learn, because everything that you do wrong, you're going to go back there and you're going to try again, try again, try again. And the repetition, it will teach you have a feeling of timing when to go. If there's, you know, there's other combinations which you always have to go with it.
Speaker B: By the way, for the Internet that's currently yelling at me for arguing with Hodra Gracie about drilling, that's called, you know, playing devil's advocate to strengthen, to explore ideas. I'm not actually arguing. Okay. I forgot to ask you, if you had to fight against the bear line, gorilla, or anaconda to the death, which one would you choose and would you be able actually to win against any of them?
Speaker A: A bear. A lion. A tiger.
Speaker B: A tiger.
Speaker A: A condo.
Speaker B: Oh, gorilla too. Gorilla. You can go. Gorilla.
Speaker A: I'll probably choose. Diana Konda.
Speaker B: That's easy. I mean, you're not allowed to run away, though, so you're in a cage.
Speaker A: Do you have to kill still the anaconda? I think I have no chance against any other ones. Zero chance.
Speaker B: That's what John thinks.
Speaker A: I think I have a tiny little against the anaconda.
Speaker B: Just wait it out. You don't, you don't think it's possible to be. I just. It feels like technique can do something against these animals, but they have so much strength, so much aggression.
Speaker A: You know, the real naked choke, translating to Portuguese, is kill the lion. So ever since I was a kid, I always thought that maybe if I get behind a lion, the real naked choke, which, you know, in Portuguese he says Mataleon. So Mataleon is kill the lion. So I always thought that that's the only way to kill a lion. Or, you know, if you're fighting against a lion, you go behind, you put the real naked choke. I think you put him to sleep. Or the name Mataleon.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Is like kill the lion.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Someone came up with the name. Why? Somebody must have, maybe someone fight with their lion. Choked him up.
Speaker B: There you go, John. There you go. I honestly. Do you think so? Actually, yeah. You. You understand controlling positions. Do you think, like animal. Like a gorilla or a lion would shake you off if you had back full you locked in?
Speaker A: Well, say the one that will have the biggest chance of staying there is the lion, because you just feel body.
Speaker B: Yeah.
Speaker A: Is smaller than a tiger, I guess. Think tigers are bigger?
Speaker B: Yes.
Speaker A: So.
Speaker B: So do you think they can shake you off, though?
Speaker A: I think I'll have a bigger chance of staying against a lion's pack than any other animal.
Speaker B: Still not answering the question. Do you think you have a chance?
Speaker A: If I start on the back, start.
Speaker B: Full, locked in, full controls. Let's say it's a small enough lion, you can actually have a full.
Speaker A: That would get so. I mean, I would like to believe so.
Speaker B: Okay. Just like you said, somebody must have been able to do it. Throughout your journey in jiu jitsu, have there been low points? Like, has there been points where you really doubted yourself?
Speaker A: No, I never really doubted myself. There's low points in defeats. Those are the low points when I lost.
Speaker B: How did you deal with defeats?
Speaker A: I just went back to the gym next week and say, I need to get better. Every time I lost, I'm like, I need to get better because I need to choke them out. I need to submit them because, you know, win by points. It's. As a black belt, I have very, very little loss, I would say. I mean, I don't like to sound like a crime, baby, but I'll say most, most of those loss was very, very controversial.
Speaker B: Yeah. It was not a dominant, clear performance. It has about referees and points and I.
Speaker A: Everything since I was very young, I always fought against my opponent and the referee. Like, it's. If that was ever in my whole life since I was a kid, there was ever a doubt. You always go to my opponent. Always. Always. That was just something that I had to do my whole life.
Speaker B: What's the motivation behind what led to the fact that you win most of your matches by submission or in dominance? Like, are you chasing?
Speaker A: Because that's the only way to prove you better. And I've never. I never fought to win tournaments. That was never my goal. That was the consequence of me trying to be the best. Like, I don't care how many titles I have. I care about. I need to beat all my opponents and not. Not win, because win is not enough. I have to submit them. That's the only way to prove I'm the best, to submit them. If I win by advantage or a point, that means I was better than them that day. That does not mean I'm better than them. If there's the top, if I take you down, pass your guard, mount you, and submit you, there's zero questions. Who's the best? Like, there's nothing you can say about it. If I foot sweep you, put your butt on the floor, I get an advantage. We carry on fighting, and I. Winden means nothing. Not even means I'm better than you.
Speaker B: And if that happened, that would haunt you.
Speaker A: It is for me. It's not enough. I wouldn't be happy.
Speaker B: What advice would you give to young folks who look at you, who are able to accomplish from a place where you're not very good to becoming the best in the world at a thing? What advice would you give them? To have a journey like that, to have a journey where they could be successful in their career and their life.
Speaker A: To such a high level determination is the most important thing. You need to know where you're going to get there. So you need to have a goal, which, whatever that goal is like, you need to set that goal for yourself so you know where you want to go and to have the determination to get there and be sure that you will fail many times. Like, you cannot let your failures bring you down because you will fail many times. Everybody does.
Speaker B: So you said you didn't look to external sources of belief. You just believed in yourself. Is there something to that where you have to try to, like, be your own source of belief? Flame the fire within yourself. Was that. Was that something difficult to do?
Speaker A: Like, that was just very natural for me. I said, you know, you can surround yourself with great people. That is extremely important. Don't surround yourself with failures, because they will. They're not gonna push you to, you know, they don't know what it is how to get there. I mean, everybody knows, but it's when you surround yourself with winners, you know, you know what it took them to get there. Use them as an example.
Speaker B: Yeah. There's a certain kind of aura to people that just achieve great things and being around them, but it's still, it's hard to find people that, especially at.
Speaker A: That early stage area. Yeah, any area.
Speaker B: That's right. Yeah. Greatness has a certain, I think it's almost humbling just to see, okay, any human, like, at least that's the lesson I learned. Almost any human can do, could be great.
Speaker A: I mean, one, I views Muhammad Ali as a great example. Look at his belief. Look at how much he believed himself before he was Muhammad Ali. Look at the determination he had, the weight, the confidence he had fighting even on his loss. They never changed him. When he fought foreman, George Foreman, not one person in the world thought he was going to win that fight by himself. He never doubted himself. Everybody else did. He won over all odds against. So it's, I mean, when you look at people like that, you can, you don't have to be a boxer to try to follow his example.
Speaker B: But see, those are like epic, giant battles. But I feel like you fight the same kind of battle when you're young and your parents tell you that just with their whole energy, that this is silly. Don't be silly. Don't be silly to chase.
Speaker A: It's harder. It is harder. But as a kid, it's harder to deal with that because, I mean, to go against adults, especially parents, telling you otherwise, like, the amount of strength you need is gigantic. I don't even know how much strength you need because that was not my case. So I can understand what you have to go through with the force of your parents telling you, you know, otherwise, but it's how much you want, it will dictate how far you're gonna go, where you're gonna go. So it's, you know, if you can break through that, you get nowhere. It's that simple.
Speaker B: And actually, one of the really nice things the Internet does that I would give advice to young people is, like, you can find, even if your parents are not a source of that, your teachers, your community, you can find people on the Internet will believe in you. It's kind of cool. It's kind of cool how the Internet opens the possibility of, like, a community of, like, 1011 year olds. Like, building shit. I see this all the time. Engineering. They, I mean, they're fuel by belief. They want to, they want to be like, they want to create the next trillion dollar company. Right there. There's that fire in their eyes, and not for the money, obviously, but to do something really impactful. And I think that fire is extinguished often by teachers and, and parents because I think the logic that parents have and teachers, they look at a kid and they don't, on the surface level, they don't see greatness, right. They just see kind of mediocrity. And so to them it's like, no, right. The world is more complicated than that. In order to get great, you have to like, like they somehow kind of always try to be reasonable with you and in so doing, extinguish the flame. It's weird.
Speaker A: I think most people are afraid to even try. So you can call them cowards for not trying, because you are a coward for not trying. Not putting yourself at risk, right. So I would say a big part of society are cowards for never trying. Never pursuing what they really want is. So it's, there is a, you know, weight, a pressure. Everyone, most people, a lot of people, I'll say around you that because they were afraid to try, they don't incentivize people to do so, because they want everybody to be like them. Because imagine if everybody around you suddenly are not afraid and everyone is trying and you look yourself in the mirror and say, I was too scared. I've never tried. So you feel really bad about yourself. So it's easier to have people around you that think exactly like you than otherwise. So they reflect a lot on the kids. It's, you know, society almost like press them down to be like everybody else, to have a normal life, normal job. It's, you know, don't take risk because you can lose it all. I mean, that's the worst thing you can tell everybody, take all the risks, lose it all a few times. That's how you're going to build things.
Speaker B: Especially when you're young. Yes, you can recover much.
Speaker A: Exactly. What's the point of not trying? You should try and you will lose everything. Doesn't matter what matters, to lose at everything. It does matter. It will teach you resilience. Try harder, go after. It's don't live a normal life because otherwise you. What we're here for.
Speaker B: Yeah, take big risks, take a lot of them. Fail and fail worse.
Speaker A: Fail and fail a thousand times until you succeed. And then you're gonna, you'll be the most proud of yourself. Like, they're not. Be priceless. It's, then we'll change the world.
Speaker B: It is true. That most people are not necessarily cowards, but have cowardice in them.
Speaker A: It's. Most people are just afraid to try it, you know?
Speaker B: And a lot of it comes from a place of love. Because, you know, if you try and you fail, you get hurt.
Speaker A: It hurts. I mean, it's not. Not a pleasant thing to fail. I mean, you feel terrible to think, you know, when I lost, any tournament was a good thing, you know, and think when I was getting beat up at the gym over and over again was a good thing. When I was getting there and getting smashed by all the good guys, I think I liked it. Well, I hate it. But it's my resilience that, you know, make me carry on until I succeed. I think I like to get tapped. Well, I'm the most competitive, one of the most competitive persons, you know. I hate to lose, but it's. I accept. I mean, I just need to get better. Every single time I lost in the championship. I hate you. I've never screamed. No one never saw me screaming, shouting that, you know, I got robbed, you know, I should have won. The referee, you know, screwed me over. I mean, it's okay. It happened. Shit happens. I need to get better. Cause I don't want to be in that position ever again. So when I fight, if I'm better, if I tapped him, there's no question. I don't need to wait for the referee to decide that there was points or no points. If, you know, his interpretation, that made me better because I was even more determined to be better. In my mind, I have to tap everybody else. Winning is not enough.
Speaker B: It's just, objectively speaking, what you learn the most from is really wanting to succeed and then failing and doing that often. That's the reality. From a parent, from a teacher perspective, from anybody, from people you love, if they really want to do something, help them do that thing. If you think they're going to fail, good, help them do that faster so they fail faster. They're going to learn the only way.
Speaker A: To succeed is failing. There is no other way. That's what people have to understand. Without failing, there is no success.
Speaker B: Since you've gotten a little softer, a little more emotionally open, what's the role of love in the human condition? Hodge, Gracie.
Speaker A: Probably the most important thing. That's the basic of everything, right? It's. I mean, love brings the best of us. It's. If we had more love and compassion from the other person, I think we'll be a more evolved species. The world would be much better place than it is now.
Speaker B: Did friends, family help you along the way?
Speaker A: Yeah, a lot. I always had a lot of love and help from many people. That's why I succeeded. I never got here by myself. I had a lot of people who loved me, believed in me and helped me get to be here today.
Speaker B: Well, I'm glad they did. I'm glad you're here today. I'm a huge fan. It was an honor to meet you. As an honor to hang out with you in Vegas, to hang out with you again today. I've just been a huge fan for a long time.
Speaker A: My pleasure man.
Speaker B: Thank you for everything you're doing. Thank you for this conversation. It was awesome.
Speaker A: Thank you very much.
Speaker B: Thanks for listening to this conversation with Hodra Grace. To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from Hodgepodge. Jiu Jitsu is simple. You just have to do it right. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time. It.
